10  After these things the Lord designated 70 others and sent them out by twos ahead of him into every city and place where he himself was to go.
2  Then he said to them: “Yes, the harvest is great, but the workers are few. Therefore, beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.
3  Go! Look! I am sending you out as lambs in among wolves.
4  Do not carry a money bag or a food pouch or sandals, and do not greet anyone along the road.
5  Wherever you enter into a house, say first: ‘May this house have peace.’
6  And if a friend of peace is there, your peace will rest upon him. But if there is not, it will return to you.
7  So stay in that house, eating and drinking the things they provide, for the worker is worthy of his wages. Do not keep transferring from house to house.
8  “Also, wherever you enter into a city and they receive you, eat what is set before you
9  and cure the sick ones in it and tell them: ‘The Kingdom of God has come near to you.’
10  But wherever you enter into a city and they do not receive you, go out into its main streets and say:
11  ‘We wipe off against you even the dust that sticks to our feet from your city. Nevertheless, know this, that the Kingdom of God has come near.’
12  I tell you that it will be more endurable for Sodʹom in that day than for that city.
13  “Woe to you, Cho·raʹzin! Woe to you, Beth·saʹi·da! because if the powerful works that have taken place in you had taken place in Tyre and Siʹdon, they would long ago have repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
14  Consequently, it will be more endurable for Tyre and Siʹdon in the judgment than for you.
15  And you, Ca·perʹna·um, will you perhaps be exalted to heaven? Down to the Grave you will come!
16  “Whoever listens to you listens to me. And whoever disregards you disregards me also. Moreover, whoever disregards me disregards also Him who sent me.”
17  Then the 70 returned with joy, saying: “Lord, even the demons are made subject to us by the use of your name.”
18  At that he said to them: “I see Satan already fallen like lightning from heaven.
19  Look! I have given you the authority to trample underfoot serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing at all will harm you.
20  Nevertheless, do not rejoice because the spirits are made subject to you, but rejoice because your names have been written in the heavens.”
21  In that very hour he became overjoyed in the holy spirit and said: “I publicly praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have carefully hidden these things from wise and intellectual ones and have revealed them to young children. Yes, O Father, because this is the way you approved.
22  All things have been handed over to me by my Father, and no one knows who the Son is except the Father, and no one knows who the Father is except the Son and anyone to whom the Son is willing to reveal him.”
23  With that he turned to the disciples and told them privately: “Happy are the eyes that see the things you are seeing.
24  For I say to you, many prophets and kings desired to see the things you are observing but did not see them, and to hear the things you are hearing but did not hear them.”
25  Now look! a man versed in the Law stood up to test him and said: “Teacher, what do I need to do to inherit everlasting life?”
26  He said to him: “What is written in the Law? How do you read?”
27  In answer he said: “‘You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole strength and with your whole mind’ and ‘your neighbor as yourself.’”
28  He said to him: “You answered correctly; keep doing this and you will get life.”
29  But wanting to prove himself righteous, the man said to Jesus: “Who really is my neighbor?”
30  In reply Jesus said: “A man was going down from Jerusalem to Jerʹi·cho and fell victim to robbers, who stripped him, beat him, and went off, leaving him half-dead.
31  Now by coincidence a priest was going down on that road, but when he saw him, he passed by on the opposite side.
32  Likewise, a Levite, when he came to the place and saw him, passed by on the opposite side.
33  But a certain Sa·marʹi·tan traveling the road came upon him, and at seeing him, he was moved with pity.
34  So he approached him and bandaged his wounds, pouring oil and wine on them. Then he mounted him on his own animal and brought him to an inn and took care of him.
35  The next day he took out two de·narʹi·i, gave them to the innkeeper, and said: ‘Take care of him, and whatever you spend besides this, I will repay you when I return.’
36  Who of these three seems to you to have made himself neighbor to the man who fell victim to the robbers?”
37  He said: “The one who acted mercifully toward him.” Jesus then said to him: “Go and do the same yourself.”
38  Now as they went on their way, he entered into a certain village. Here a woman named Martha received him as a guest in her house.
39  She also had a sister called Mary, who sat down at the feet of the Lord and kept listening to what he was saying.
40  Martha, on the other hand, was distracted with attending to many duties. So she came to him and said: “Lord, does it not matter to you that my sister has left me alone to attend to things? Tell her to come and help me.”
41  In answer the Lord said to her: “Martha, Martha, you are anxious and disturbed about many things.
42  A few things, though, are needed, or just one. For her part, Mary chose the good portion, and it will not be taken away from her.”
4  Then Jesus, full of holy spirit, turned away from the Jordan, and he was led about by the spirit in the wilderness
2  for 40 days, being tempted by the Devil. And he ate nothing in those days, so when they had ended, he felt hungry.
3  At this the Devil said to him: “If you are a son of God, tell this stone to become a loaf of bread.”
4  But Jesus answered him: “It is written, ‘Man must not live on bread alone.’”
5  So he brought him up and showed him all the kingdoms of the inhabited earth in an instant of time.
6  Then the Devil said to him: “I will give you all this authority and their glory, because it has been handed over to me, and I give it to whomever I wish.
7  If you, therefore, do an act of worship before me, it will all be yours.”
8  In reply Jesus said to him: “It is written, ‘It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.’”
9  He then led him into Jerusalem and stationed him on the battlement of the temple and said to him: “If you are a son of God, throw yourself down from here,
10  for it is written, ‘He will give his angels a command concerning you, to preserve you,’
11  and, ‘They will carry you on their hands, so that you may not strike your foot against a stone.’”
12  In answer Jesus said to him: “It is said, ‘You must not put Jehovah your God to the test.’”
13  So the Devil, having finished all the temptation, departed from him until another convenient time.
14  Now Jesus returned in the power of the spirit into Galʹi·lee. And good reports about him spread throughout all the surrounding country.
15  Also, he began to teach in their synagogues, and he was held in honor by all.
16  He then went to Nazʹa·reth, where he had been brought up, and according to his custom on the Sabbath day, he entered the synagogue and stood up to read.
17  So the scroll of the prophet Isaiah was handed to him, and he opened the scroll and found the place where it was written:
18  “Jehovah’s spirit is upon me, because he anointed me to declare good news to the poor. He sent me to proclaim liberty to the captives and a recovery of sight to the blind, to send the crushed ones away free,
19  to preach Jehovah’s acceptable year.”
20  With that he rolled up the scroll, handed it back to the attendant, and sat down; and the eyes of all in the synagogue were intently fixed on him.
21  Then he began to say to them: “Today this scripture that you just heard is fulfilled.”
22  And they all began to give favorable witness about him and to be amazed at the gracious words coming out of his mouth, and they were saying: “This is a son of Joseph, is it not?”
23  At this he said to them: “No doubt you will apply this saying to me, ‘Physician, cure yourself. Do also here in your home territory the things we have heard were done in Ca·perʹna·um.’”
24  So he said: “Truly I tell you that no prophet is accepted in his home territory.
25  For instance, I tell you in truth: There were many widows in Israel in the days of E·liʹjah when heaven was shut up for three years and six months, and a great famine came on all the land.
26  Yet E·liʹjah was sent to none of those women, but only to a widow in Zarʹe·phath in the land of Siʹdon.
27  Also, there were many lepers in Israel in the time of E·liʹsha the prophet; yet not one of them was cleansed, only Naʹa·man the Syrian.”
28  Now all those hearing these things in the synagogue became filled with anger,
29  and they rose up and rushed him outside the city, and they led him to the brow of the mountain on which their city had been built, in order to throw him down headlong.
30  But he went right through their midst and continued on his way.
31  He then went down to Ca·perʹna·um, a city of Galʹi·lee. And he was teaching them on the Sabbath,
32  and they were astounded at his way of teaching, because he spoke with authority.
33  Now in the synagogue there was a man with a spirit, an unclean demon, and he shouted with a loud voice:
34  “Ah! What have we to do with you, Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ? Did you come to destroy us? I know exactly who you are, the Holy One of God.”
35  But Jesus rebuked it, saying: “Be silent, and come out of him.” So after throwing the man down in their midst, the demon came out of him without hurting him.
36  At this they were all astonished and began to say to one another: “What kind of speech is this? For with authority and power he orders the unclean spirits, and out they come!”
37  So the news about him kept spreading into every corner of the surrounding country.
38  After leaving the synagogue, he entered into Simon’s home. Now Simon’s mother-in-law was suffering with a high fever, and they asked him to help her.
39  So he stood over her and rebuked the fever, and it left her. Instantly she got up and began ministering to them.
40  But when the sun was setting, all those who had people sick with various diseases brought them to him. By laying his hands on each one of them, he cured them.
41  Demons also came out of many, crying out and saying: “You are the Son of God.” But rebuking them, he would not permit them to speak, for they knew him to be the Christ.
42  However, at daybreak he departed and went to an isolated place. But the crowds began searching for him and came to where he was, and they tried to keep him from going away from them.
43  But he said to them: “I must also declare the good news of the Kingdom of God to other cities, because for this I was sent.”
44  So he went on preaching in the synagogues of Ju·deʹa.
11  Now he was in a certain place praying, and when he stopped, one of his disciples said to him: “Lord, teach us how to pray, just as John also taught his disciples.”
2  So he said to them: “Whenever you pray, say: ‘Father, let your name be sanctified. Let your Kingdom come.
3  Give us each day our bread according to our daily needs.
4  And forgive us our sins, for we ourselves also forgive everyone who is in debt to us; and do not bring us into temptation.’”
5  Then he said to them: “Suppose one of you has a friend and you go to him at midnight and say to him, ‘Friend, lend me three loaves,
6  because one of my friends has just come to me on a journey and I have nothing to offer him.’
7  But that one replies from inside: ‘Stop bothering me. The door is already locked, and my young children are with me in bed. I cannot get up and give you anything.’
8  I tell you, even if he will not get up and give him anything because of being his friend, certainly because of his bold persistence he will get up and give him whatever he needs.
9  So I say to you, keep on asking, and it will be given you; keep on seeking, and you will find; keep on knocking, and it will be opened to you.
10  For everyone asking receives, and everyone seeking finds, and to everyone knocking, it will be opened.
11  Indeed, which father among you, if his son asks for a fish, will hand him a serpent instead of a fish?
12  Or if he also asks for an egg, will hand him a scorpion?
13  Therefore, if you, although being wicked, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more so will the Father in heaven give holy spirit to those asking him!”
14  Later he expelled a speechless demon. After the demon came out, the speechless man spoke, and the crowds were amazed.
15  But some of them said: “He expels the demons by means of Be·elʹze·bub, the ruler of the demons.”
16  And others, to test him, began demanding a sign out of heaven from him.
17  Knowing their thinking, he said to them: “Every kingdom divided against itself comes to ruin, and a house divided against itself falls.
18  In the same way, if Satan is also divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? For you say I expel the demons by means of Be·elʹze·bub.
19  If I expel the demons by means of Be·elʹze·bub, by whom do your sons expel them? This is why they will be your judges.
20  But if it is by means of God’s finger that I expel the demons, the Kingdom of God has really overtaken you.
21  When a strong, well-armed man guards his palace, his belongings remain secure.
22  But when someone stronger than he is comes against him and conquers him, that man takes away all his weapons in which he was trusting, and he divides up the things he took from him.
23  Whoever is not on my side is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.
24  “When an unclean spirit comes out of a man, it passes through waterless places in search of a resting-place, and after finding none, it says, ‘I will return to my house from which I moved.’
25  And on arriving, it finds the house swept clean and adorned.
26  Then it goes and takes along seven other spirits more wicked than itself, and after getting inside, they dwell there. So the final circumstances of that man become worse than the first.”
27  Now as he was saying these things, a woman from the crowd called out to him: “Happy is the womb that carried you and the breasts that nursed you!”
28  But he said: “No, rather, happy are those hearing the word of God and keeping it!”
29  When the crowds were massing together, he began to say: “This generation is a wicked generation; it looks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of Joʹnah.
30  For just as Joʹnah became a sign to the Ninʹe·vites, so will the Son of man be to this generation.
31  The queen of the south will be raised up in the judgment with the men of this generation and will condemn them, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solʹo·mon. But look! something more than Solʹo·mon is here.
32  The men of Ninʹe·veh will rise in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it, because they repented at what Joʹnah preached. But look! something more than Joʹnah is here.
33  After lighting a lamp, a person puts it, not in a hidden place nor under a basket, but on the lampstand, so that those who come in may see the light.
34  The lamp of the body is your eye. When your eye is focused, your whole body is also bright; but when it is envious, your body is also dark.
35  Be alert, therefore, that the light that is in you is not darkness.
36  Therefore, if your whole body is bright with no part of it dark, it will all be as bright as when a lamp gives you light by its rays.”
37  When he had said this, a Pharisee asked him to dine with him. So he went in and reclined at the table.
38  However, the Pharisee was surprised at seeing that he did not first wash before the dinner.
39  But the Lord said to him: “Now you Pharisees, you cleanse the outside of the cup and dish, but inside you are full of greediness and wickedness.
40  Unreasonable ones! The one who made the outside made also the inside, did he not?
41  But give as gifts of mercy the things that are from within, and look! everything about you will be clean.
42  But woe to you Pharisees, because you give the tenth of the mint and of the rue and of every other garden herb, but you disregard the justice and the love of God! These things you were under obligation to do, but not to disregard those other things.
43  Woe to you Pharisees, because you love the front seats in the synagogues and the greetings in the marketplaces!
44  Woe to you, because you are as those graves that are not clearly visible, that men walk on and do not know it!”
45  In reply one of those versed in the Law said to him: “Teacher, in saying these things, you insult us also.”
46  Then he said: “Woe also to you who are versed in the Law, because you load men down with loads hard to carry, but you yourselves do not touch the loads with one of your fingers!
47  “Woe to you, because you build the tombs of the prophets, but your forefathers killed them!
48  Certainly you are witnesses of the deeds of your forefathers, and yet you approve of them, for they killed the prophets but you are building their tombs.
49  That is why the wisdom of God also said: ‘I will send prophets and apostles to them, and they will kill and persecute some of them,
50  so that the blood of all the prophets spilled from the founding of the world may be charged against this generation,
51  from the blood of Abel down to the blood of Zech·a·riʹah, who was killed between the altar and the house.’ Yes, I tell you, it will be charged against this generation.
52  “Woe to you who are versed in the Law, because you took away the key of knowledge. You yourselves did not go in, and you hinder those going in!”
53  So when he went out from there, the scribes and the Pharisees began to put extreme pressure on him and to ply him with many more questions,
54  lying in wait for him to catch him in something he might say.
8  Shortly afterward he traveled from city to city and from village to village, preaching and declaring the good news of the Kingdom of God. And the Twelve were with him,
2  as were certain women who had been cured of wicked spirits and sicknesses: Mary who was called Magʹda·lene, from whom seven demons had come out;
3  Jo·anʹna the wife of Chuʹza, Herod’s man in charge; Su·sanʹna; and many other women, who were ministering to them from their belongings.
4  Now when a large crowd had gathered together with those who went to him from city to city, he spoke by means of an illustration:
5  “A sower went out to sow his seed. As he was sowing, some of them fell alongside the road and were trampled on, and the birds of heaven ate them up.
6  Some landed on the rock, and after sprouting, they dried up because they had no moisture.
7  Others fell among the thorns, and the thorns that grew up with them choked them.
8  But others fell on the good soil, and after sprouting, they produced 100 times more fruit.” As he said these things, he called out: “Let the one who has ears to listen, listen.”
9  But his disciples asked him what this illustration meant.
10  He said: “To you it is granted to understand the sacred secrets of the Kingdom of God, but for the rest it is in illustrations so that, though looking, they may look in vain, and though hearing, they may not get the sense.
11  Now the illustration means this: The seed is the word of God.
12  Those alongside the road are the ones who have heard, and then the Devil comes and takes the word away from their hearts so that they may not believe and be saved.
13  Those on the rock are the ones who, when they hear the word, receive it with joy, but these have no root. They believe for a while, but in a season of testing, they fall away.
14  As for that which fell among the thorns, these are the ones who have heard, but by being carried away by anxieties, riches, and pleasures of this life, they are completely choked and bring nothing to maturity.
15  As for that on the fine soil, these are the ones who, after hearing the word with a fine and good heart, retain it and bear fruit with endurance.
16  “No one after lighting a lamp covers it with a vessel or puts it underneath a bed, but he puts it on a lampstand so that those who come in may see the light.
17  For there is nothing hidden that will not become manifest, nor anything carefully concealed that will never become known and not come out in the open.
18  Therefore, pay attention to how you listen, for whoever has will be given more, but whoever does not have, even what he imagines he has will be taken away from him.”
19  Now his mother and brothers came to him, but they were unable to get near him because of the crowd.
20  So it was reported to him: “Your mother and your brothers are standing outside, wanting to see you.”
21  In reply he said to them: “My mother and my brothers are these who hear the word of God and do it.”
22  One day he and his disciples got into a boat, and he said to them: “Let us cross to the other side of the lake.” So they set sail.
23  But as they were sailing along, he fell asleep. And a violent windstorm descended on the lake, and their boat began to fill up with water and to be in danger.
24  So they went and woke him up, saying: “Instructor, Instructor, we are about to perish!” With that he got up and rebuked the wind and the raging of the water, and they subsided, and a calm set in.
25  Then he said to them: “Where is your faith?” But they were filled with fear and were astounded, saying to one another: “Who really is this? For he orders even the winds and the water, and they obey him.”
26  And they put in to shore in the region of the Gerʹa·senes, which is on the side opposite Galʹi·lee.
27  As Jesus got out onto land, a demon-possessed man from the city met him. For a considerable time he had not worn clothing, and he was staying, not in a house, but among the tombs.
28  At the sight of Jesus, he cried out and fell down before him, and with a loud voice, he said: “What have I to do with you, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I beg you, do not torment me.”
29  (For Jesus had been ordering the unclean spirit to come out of the man. It had seized him on many occasions, and he was repeatedly bound with chains and fetters and kept under guard, but he would break the bonds and be driven by the demon into the isolated places.)
30  Jesus asked him: “What is your name?” He said: “Legion,” for many demons had entered into him.
31  And they kept pleading with him not to order them to go away into the abyss.
32  Now a large herd of swine was feeding there on the mountain, so they pleaded with him to permit them to enter into the swine, and he gave them permission.
33  With that the demons came out of the man and went into the swine, and the herd rushed over the precipice into the lake and drowned.
34  But when the herders saw what had happened, they fled and reported it in the city and in the countryside.
35  Then people went out to see what had happened. They came to Jesus and found the man from whom the demons had come out, clothed and in his right mind, sitting at the feet of Jesus, and they grew fearful.
36  Those who had seen it reported to them how the demon-possessed man had been made well.
37  Then a great number from the surrounding region of the Gerʹa·senes asked Jesus to go away from them, because they were gripped by great fear. Then he went aboard the boat to depart.
38  However, the man from whom the demons had gone out kept begging to continue with him, but he sent the man away, saying:
39  “Go back home, and keep on relating what God did for you.” So he went away, proclaiming throughout the whole city what Jesus had done for him.
40  When Jesus returned, the crowd received him kindly, for they were all expecting him.
41  But look! a man named Jaʹi·rus came; this man was a presiding officer of the synagogue. And he fell at the feet of Jesus and began to plead with him to come to his house,
42  because his only daughter, who was about 12 years old, was dying. As Jesus was going, the crowds pressed in on him.
43  Now there was a woman who had a flow of blood for 12 years, and she had not been able to get a cure from anyone.
44  She approached from behind and touched the fringe of his outer garment, and immediately her flow of blood stopped.
45  So Jesus said: “Who touched me?” When they were all denying it, Peter said: “Instructor, the crowds are hemming you in and pressing against you.”
46  But Jesus said: “Someone touched me, for I know that power went out of me.”
47  Seeing that she had not escaped notice, the woman came trembling and fell down before him and declared before all the people why she touched him and how she was healed immediately.
48  But he said to her: “Daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in peace.”
49  While he was yet speaking, a representative of the presiding officer of the synagogue came, saying: “Your daughter has died; do not bother the Teacher any longer.”
50  On hearing this, Jesus answered him: “Have no fear, only have faith, and she will be saved.”
51  When he reached the house, he did not let anyone go in with him except Peter, John, James, and the girl’s father and mother.
52  But people were all weeping and beating themselves in grief for her. So he said: “Stop weeping, for she did not die but is sleeping.”
53  At this they began to laugh at him scornfully, because they knew she had died.
54  But he took her by the hand and called to her: “Child, get up!”
55  And her spirit returned, and she rose immediately, and he ordered that something be given her to eat.
56  Well, her parents were beside themselves, but he instructed them to tell no one what had happened.
16  Then he also said to the disciples: “A rich man had a steward who was accused of handling his goods wastefully.
2  So he called him and said, ‘What is this I hear about you? Hand in the account of your stewardship, for you can no longer manage the house.’
3  Then the steward said to himself, ‘What am I to do, seeing that my master is taking the stewardship away from me? I am not strong enough to dig, and I am ashamed to beg.
4  Ah! I know what I will do, so that when I am removed from the stewardship, people will welcome me into their homes.’
5  And calling to him each one of his master’s debtors, he said to the first, ‘How much do you owe my master?’
6  He replied, ‘A hundred measures of olive oil.’ He said to him, ‘Take back your written agreement and sit down and quickly write 50.’
7  Next, he said to another one, ‘Now you, how much do you owe?’ He said, ‘A hundred large measures of wheat.’ He said to him, ‘Take back your written agreement and write 80.’
8  And his master commended the steward, though unrighteous, because he acted with practical wisdom; for the sons of this system of things are wiser in a practical way toward their own generation than the sons of the light are.
9  “Also, I say to you: Make friends for yourselves by means of the unrighteous riches, so that when such fail, they may receive you into the everlasting dwelling places.
10  The person faithful in what is least is faithful also in much, and the person unrighteous in what is least is unrighteous also in much.
11  Therefore, if you have not proved yourselves faithful in connection with the unrighteous riches, who will entrust you with what is true?
12  And if you have not proved yourselves faithful in connection with what belongs to another, who will give you something for yourselves?
13  No servant can be a slave to two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will stick to the one and despise the other. You cannot be slaves to God and to Riches.”
14  Now the Pharisees, who were money lovers, were listening to all these things, and they began to sneer at him.
15  So he said to them: “You are those who declare yourselves righteous before men, but God knows your hearts. For what is considered exalted by men is a disgusting thing in God’s sight.
16  “The Law and the Prophets were until John. From then on, the Kingdom of God is being declared as good news, and every sort of person is pressing forward toward it.
17  Indeed, it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than for one stroke of a letter of the Law to go unfulfilled.
18  “Everyone who divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery, and whoever marries a woman divorced from her husband commits adultery.
19  “There was a rich man who used to dress in purple and linen, enjoying himself day after day with magnificence.
20  But a beggar named Lazʹa·rus used to be put at his gate, covered with ulcers
21  and desiring to be filled with the things dropping from the table of the rich man. Yes, even the dogs would come and lick his ulcers.
22  Now in the course of time, the beggar died and was carried off by the angels to Abraham’s side. “Also, the rich man died and was buried.
23  And in the Grave he lifted up his eyes, being in torment, and he saw Abraham from afar and Lazʹa·rus by his side.
24  So he called and said, ‘Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazʹa·rus to dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue, for I am in anguish in this blazing fire.’
25  But Abraham said, ‘Child, remember that you had your fill of good things in your lifetime, but Lazʹa·rus for his part received bad things. Now, however, he is being comforted here, but you are in anguish.
26  And besides all these things, a great chasm has been fixed between us and you, so that those who want to go over from here to you cannot, neither may people cross over from there to us.’
27  Then he said, ‘That being so, I ask you, father, to send him to the house of my father,
28  for I have five brothers, in order that he may give them a thorough witness so that they will not also come into this place of torment.’
29  But Abraham said, ‘They have Moses and the Prophets; let them listen to these.’
30  Then he said, ‘No, indeed, father Abraham, but if someone from the dead goes to them, they will repent.’
31  But he said to him, ‘If they do not listen to Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded if someone rises from the dead.’”
18  Then he went on to tell them an illustration about the need for them always to pray and not to give up,
2  saying: “In a certain city there was a judge who had no fear of God and no respect for man.
3  There was also a widow in that city who kept going to him and saying, ‘See that I get justice from my legal opponent.’
4  Well, for a while he was unwilling, but afterward he said to himself, ‘Although I do not fear God or respect any man,
5  because this widow keeps making me trouble, I will see that she gets justice so that she will not keep coming and wearing me out with her demand.’”
6  Then the Lord said: “Hear what the judge, although unrighteous, said!
7  Certainly, then, will not God cause justice to be done for his chosen ones who cry out to him day and night, while he is patient toward them?
8  I tell you, he will cause justice to be done to them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man arrives, will he really find this faith on the earth?”
9  He also told this illustration to some who trusted in their own righteousness and who considered others as nothing:
10  “Two men went up into the temple to pray, the one a Pharisee and the other a tax collector.
11  The Pharisee stood and began to pray these things to himself, ‘O God, I thank you that I am not like everyone else—extortioners, unrighteous, adulterers—or even like this tax collector.
12  I fast twice a week; I give the tenth of all things I acquire.’
13  But the tax collector, standing at a distance, was not willing even to raise his eyes heavenward but kept beating his chest, saying, ‘O God, be gracious to me, a sinner.’
14  I tell you, this man went down to his home and was proved more righteous than that Pharisee. Because everyone who exalts himself will be humiliated, but whoever humbles himself will be exalted.”
15  Now people were also bringing him their infants for him to touch them, but on seeing this, the disciples began to reprimand them.
16  However, Jesus called the infants to him, saying: “Let the young children come to me, and do not try to stop them, for the Kingdom of God belongs to such ones.
17  Truly I say to you, whoever does not receive the Kingdom of God like a young child will by no means enter into it.”
18  And one of the rulers questioned him, saying: “Good Teacher, what must I do to inherit everlasting life?”
19  Jesus said to him: “Why do you call me good? Nobody is good except one, God.
20  You know the commandments: ‘Do not commit adultery, do not murder, do not steal, do not bear false witness, honor your father and your mother.’”
21  Then he said: “All of these I have kept from youth on.”
22  After hearing that, Jesus said to him, “There is still one thing lacking about you: Sell all the things you have and distribute the proceeds to the poor, and you will have treasure in the heavens; and come be my follower.”
23  When he heard this, he became deeply grieved, for he was very rich.
24  Jesus looked at him and said: “How difficult it will be for those having money to make their way into the Kingdom of God!
25  It is easier, in fact, for a camel to get through the eye of a sewing needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God.”
26  Those who heard this said: “Who possibly can be saved?”
27  He said: “The things impossible with men are possible with God.”
28  But Peter said: “Look! We have left what was ours and followed you.”
29  He said to them: “Truly I say to you, there is no one who has left house or wife or brothers or parents or children for the sake of the Kingdom of God
30  who will not get many times more in this period of time, and in the coming system of things, everlasting life.”
31  Then he took the Twelve aside and said to them: “Look! We are going up to Jerusalem, and all the things written by means of the prophets about the Son of man will be accomplished.
32  For instance, he will be handed over to men of the nations and will be mocked and treated insolently and spat on.
33  And after scourging him, they will kill him, but on the third day he will rise.”
34  However, they did not get the meaning of any of these things, for these words were hidden from them, and they did not understand the things said.
35  Now as Jesus was getting near to Jerʹi·cho, a blind man was sitting beside the road begging.
36  Because he heard a crowd passing by, he began to inquire what was going on.
37  They reported to him: “Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ is passing by!”
38  At that he cried out: “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!”
39  And those who were in front began rebuking him, telling him to keep quiet, but all the more he kept shouting: “Son of David, have mercy on me!”
40  Then Jesus stopped and commanded that the man be brought to him. After he came near, Jesus asked him:
41  “What do you want me to do for you?” He said: “Lord, let me recover my sight.”
42  So Jesus said to him: “Recover your sight; your faith has made you well.”
43  And instantly he recovered his sight, and he began to follow him, glorifying God. Also, at seeing it, all the people gave praise to God.
17  Then he said to his disciples: “It is unavoidable that causes for stumbling should come. Nevertheless, woe to the one through whom they come!
2  It would be more advantageous for him if a millstone were hung from his neck and he were thrown into the sea than for him to stumble one of these little ones.
3  Pay attention to yourselves. If your brother commits a sin, rebuke him, and if he repents, forgive him.
4  Even if he sins seven times a day against you and he comes back to you seven times, saying, ‘I repent,’ you must forgive him.”
5  Now the apostles said to the Lord: “Give us more faith.”
6  Then the Lord said: “If you had faith the size of a mustard grain, you would say to this black mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted and planted in the sea!’ and it would obey you.
7  “Which one of you who has a slave plowing or shepherding would say to him when he comes in from the field, ‘Come here at once and dine at the table’?
8  Rather, will he not say to him, ‘Get something ready for me to have my evening meal, and put on an apron and serve me until I finish eating and drinking, and afterward you can eat and drink’?
9  He will not feel gratitude to the slave because he did what was assigned, will he?
10  Likewise, when you have done all the things assigned to you, say: ‘We are good-for-nothing slaves. What we have done is what we ought to have done.’”
11  While he was going to Jerusalem, he was passing between Sa·marʹi·a and Galʹi·lee.
12  And as he was entering a village, ten men with leprosy met him, but they stood at a distance.
13  And they raised their voices and said: “Jesus, Instructor, have mercy on us!”
14  When he saw them, he said to them: “Go and show yourselves to the priests.” Then as they were going off, they were cleansed.
15  One of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, glorifying God with a loud voice.
16  And he fell facedown at Jesus’ feet, thanking him. Furthermore, he was a Sa·marʹi·tan.
17  In reply Jesus said: “All ten were cleansed, were they not? Where, then, are the other nine?
18  Did no one else turn back to give glory to God except this man of another nation?”
19  Then he said to him: “Get up and be on your way; your faith has made you well.”
20  On being asked by the Pharisees when the Kingdom of God was coming, he answered them: “The Kingdom of God is not coming with striking observableness;
21  nor will people say, ‘See here!’ or, ‘There!’ For look! the Kingdom of God is in your midst.”
22  Then he said to the disciples: “Days will come when you will desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, but you will not see it.
23  And people will say to you, ‘See there!’ or, ‘See here!’ Do not go out or chase after them.
24  For just as lightning flashes from one part of heaven to another part of heaven, so the Son of man will be in his day.
25  First, however, he must undergo many sufferings and be rejected by this generation.
26  Moreover, just as it occurred in the days of Noah, so it will be in the days of the Son of man:
27  they were eating, they were drinking, men were marrying, women were being given in marriage until that day when Noah entered into the ark, and the Flood came and destroyed them all.
28  Likewise, just as it occurred in the days of Lot: they were eating, they were drinking, they were buying, they were selling, they were planting, they were building.
29  But on the day that Lot went out of Sodʹom, it rained fire and sulfur from heaven and destroyed them all.
30  It will be the same on that day when the Son of man is revealed.
31  “On that day let the person who is on the housetop but whose belongings are in the house not come down to pick these up, and likewise, the person out in the field must not return to the things behind.
32  Remember the wife of Lot.
33  Whoever seeks to keep his life safe will lose it, but whoever loses it will preserve it alive.
34  I tell you, in that night two people will be in one bed; the one will be taken along, but the other will be abandoned.
35  There will be two women grinding at the same mill; the one will be taken along, but the other will be abandoned.”
36  ——
37  So in response they said to him: “Where, Lord?” He said to them: “Where the body is, there also the eagles will be gathered together.”
9  Then he called the Twelve together and gave them power and authority over all the demons and to cure diseases.
2  And he sent them out to preach the Kingdom of God and to heal,
3  and he said to them: “Carry nothing for the trip, neither staff nor food pouch nor bread nor money; neither have two garments.
4  But wherever you enter into a home, stay there and leave from there.
5  And wherever people do not receive you, on going out of that city, shake the dust off your feet for a witness against them.”
6  Then starting out, they went through the territory from village to village, declaring the good news and performing cures everywhere.
7  Now Herod the district ruler heard about everything that was happening, and he was greatly perplexed because some were saying that John had been raised up from the dead,
8  but others were saying that E·liʹjah had appeared, and still others that one of the ancient prophets had risen.
9  Herod said: “John I beheaded. Who, then, is this about whom I am hearing such things?” So he was trying to see him.
10  When the apostles returned, they reported to Jesus all they had done. With that he took them along and withdrew privately into a city called Beth·saʹi·da.
11  But the crowds, getting to know it, followed him. And he received them kindly and began to speak to them about the Kingdom of God, and he healed those needing a cure.
12  Then the day was coming to a close. The Twelve now came up and said to him: “Send the crowd away, so that they may go into the surrounding villages and countryside to find lodging and provisions, because out here we are in an isolated place.”
13  But he said to them: “You give them something to eat.” They said: “We have nothing more than five loaves and two fish, unless perhaps we ourselves go and buy food for all these people.”
14  There were, in fact, about 5,000 men. But he said to his disciples: “Have them sit down in groups of about 50 each.”
15  And they did so and had them all sit down.
16  Taking now the five loaves and the two fish, he looked up to heaven and blessed them. Then he broke them up and began giving them to the disciples to set before the crowd.
17  So they all ate and were satisfied, and they took up the leftovers, 12 baskets of fragments.
18  Later, while he was praying alone, the disciples came to him, and he questioned them, saying: “Who are the crowds saying that I am?”
19  In reply they said: “John the Baptist, but others say E·liʹjah, and still others say that one of the ancient prophets has risen.”
20  Then he said to them: “You, though, who do you say I am?” Peter answered: “The Christ of God.”
21  Then in a stern talk to them, he instructed them not to tell this to anybody,
22  but he said: “The Son of man must undergo many sufferings and be rejected by the elders and the chief priests and the scribes and be killed, and on the third day be raised up.”
23  Then he went on to say to all: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake day after day and keep following me.
24  For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake is the one who will save it.
25  Really, what good will it do a man if he gains the whole world but loses his own self or suffers ruin?
26  For whoever becomes ashamed of me and of my words, the Son of man will be ashamed of that person when he comes in his glory and that of the Father and of the holy angels.
27  But I tell you truly, there are some of those standing here who will not taste death at all until first they see the Kingdom of God.”
28  In fact, about eight days after saying these words, he took Peter, John, and James along and climbed up the mountain to pray.
29  And as he was praying, the appearance of his face changed and his clothing became glitteringly white.
30  And look! two men were conversing with him; they were Moses and E·liʹjah.
31  These appeared with glory and began talking about his departure, which he was about to fulfill at Jerusalem.
32  Now Peter and those with him were weighed down with sleep, but when they became fully awake, they saw his glory and the two men standing with him.
33  And as these were departing from him, Peter said to Jesus: “Instructor, it is fine for us to be here. So let us erect three tents, one for you, one for Moses, and one for E·liʹjah.” He did not realize what he was saying.
34  But as he was saying these things, a cloud formed and began to overshadow them. As they entered into the cloud, they became afraid.
35  Then a voice came out of the cloud, saying: “This is my Son, the one who has been chosen. Listen to him.”
36  As the voice spoke, Jesus was found alone. But they kept quiet and did not report to anyone in those days any of the things they saw.
37  The following day when they came down from the mountain, a large crowd met him.
38  And look! a man called out from the crowd, saying: “Teacher, I beg you to take a look at my son, because he is my only one.
39  And look! a spirit seizes him, and suddenly he cries out, and it throws him into convulsions with foaming at the mouth, and only with difficulty does it leave him after bruising him.
40  I begged your disciples to expel it, but they could not.”
41  In response Jesus said: “O faithless and twisted generation, how long must I continue with you and put up with you? Bring your son over here.”
42  But even as he was approaching, the demon hurled him to the ground and violently threw him into a convulsion. However, Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit and healed the boy and gave him back to his father.
43  And they were all astounded at the majestic power of God. While they were all astonished at all the things he was doing, he said to his disciples:
44  “Listen carefully and remember these words, for the Son of man is going to be betrayed into men’s hands.”
45  But they did not understand what he was saying. In fact, it was concealed from them so that they might not grasp it, and they were afraid to question him about this saying.
46  Then a dispute arose among them about which one of them was the greatest.
47  Jesus, knowing the reasoning of their hearts, took a young child, stood him beside him,
48  and said to them: “Whoever receives this young child on the basis of my name receives me also; and whoever receives me also receives the One who sent me. For the one who conducts himself as a lesser one among all of you is the one who is great.”
49  In response John said: “Instructor, we saw someone expelling demons by using your name, and we tried to prevent him, because he is not following with us.”
50  But Jesus said to him: “Do not try to prevent him, for whoever is not against you is for you.”
51  As the days were drawing near for him to be taken up, he resolutely set his face to go to Jerusalem.
52  So he sent messengers ahead of him. And they went and entered a village of Sa·marʹi·tans to make preparations for him.
53  But they did not receive him, because he was determined to go to Jerusalem.
54  When the disciples James and John saw this, they said: “Lord, do you want us to call fire down from heaven and annihilate them?”
55  But he turned and rebuked them.
56  So they went to a different village.
57  Now as they were going along the road, someone said to him: “I will follow you wherever you go.”
58  But Jesus said to him: “Foxes have dens and birds of heaven have nests, but the Son of man has nowhere to lay down his head.”
59  Then he said to another: “Be my follower.” The man said: “Lord, permit me first to go and bury my father.”
60  But he said to him: “Let the dead bury their dead, but you go and declare abroad the Kingdom of God.”
61  And still another said: “I will follow you, Lord, but first permit me to say good-bye to those in my household.”
62  Jesus said to him: “No man who has put his hand to a plow and looks at the things behind is well-suited for the Kingdom of God.”
7  When he had completed what he had to say to the people, he entered Ca·perʹna·um.
2  Now an army officer’s slave, who was dear to him, was seriously ill and about to pass away.
3  When he heard about Jesus, he sent some elders of the Jews to him to ask him to come and make his slave well.
4  They came up to Jesus and began to plead with him earnestly, saying: “He is worthy of your granting him this,
5  for he loves our nation and he himself built our synagogue.”
6  So Jesus went with them. But when he was not far from the house, the army officer had already sent friends to say to him: “Sir, do not bother, for I am not worthy to have you come under my roof.
7  That is why I did not consider myself worthy to come to you. But say the word, and let my servant be healed.
8  For I too am a man placed under authority, having soldiers under me, and I say to this one, ‘Go!’ and he goes, and to another, ‘Come!’ and he comes, and to my slave, ‘Do this!’ and he does it.”
9  When Jesus heard these things, he was amazed at him, and he turned to the crowd following him and said: “I tell you, not even in Israel have I found so great a faith.”
10  And when those who had been sent returned to the house, they found the slave in good health.
11  Soon afterward he traveled to a city called Naʹin, and his disciples and a large crowd were traveling with him.
12  As he got near the gate of the city, why look! there was a dead man being carried out, the only son of his mother. Besides, she was a widow. A considerable crowd from the city was also with her.
13  When the Lord caught sight of her, he was moved with pity for her, and he said to her: “Stop weeping.”
14  With that he approached and touched the bier, and the bearers stood still. Then he said: “Young man, I say to you, get up!”
15  And the dead man sat up and started to speak, and Jesus gave him to his mother.
16  Now fear seized them all, and they began to glorify God, saying: “A great prophet has been raised up among us,” and, “God has turned his attention to his people.”
17  And this news concerning him spread out into all Ju·deʹa and all the surrounding country.
18  Now John’s disciples reported to him all these things.
19  So John summoned two of his disciples and sent them to the Lord to ask: “Are you the Coming One, or are we to expect a different one?”
20  When they came to him, the men said: “John the Baptist sent us to you to ask, ‘Are you the Coming One, or are we to expect another?’”
21  In that hour he cured many people of sicknesses, serious diseases, and wicked spirits, and he granted many blind people the gift of sight.
22  In reply he said to them: “Go and report to John what you have seen and heard: The blind are now seeing, the lame are walking, the lepers are being cleansed, the deaf are hearing, the dead are being raised up, and the poor are being told the good news.
23  Happy is the one who finds no cause for stumbling in me.”
24  When the messengers of John had gone away, Jesus began to speak to the crowds about John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed being tossed by the wind?
25  What, then, did you go out to see? A man dressed in soft garments? Why, those wearing splendid dress and living in luxury are in royal houses.
26  Really, then, what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and far more than a prophet.
27  This is the one about whom it is written: ‘Look! I am sending my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way ahead of you.’
28  I tell you, among those born of women there is no one greater than John, but a lesser person in the Kingdom of God is greater than he is.”
29  (When all the people and the tax collectors heard this, they declared God to be righteous, for they had been baptized with the baptism of John.
30  But the Pharisees and those versed in the Law disregarded the counsel of God to them, since they had not been baptized by him.)
31  “With whom, therefore, should I compare the men of this generation, and whom are they like?
32  They are like young children sitting in a marketplace and calling out to one another, saying: ‘We played the flute for you, but you did not dance; we wailed, but you did not weep.’
33  Likewise, John the Baptist has come neither eating bread nor drinking wine, but you say: ‘He has a demon.’
34  The Son of man has come eating and drinking, but you say: ‘Look! A man who is a glutton and is given to drinking wine, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’
35  All the same, wisdom is proved righteous by all its children.”
36  Now one of the Pharisees kept asking him to dine with him. So he entered the house of the Pharisee and reclined at the table.
37  And look! a woman who was known in the city to be a sinner learned that he was dining in the house of the Pharisee, and she brought an alabaster jar of perfumed oil.
38  Taking a position behind him at his feet, she wept and began to wet his feet with her tears, and she wiped them off with the hair of her head. Also, she tenderly kissed his feet and poured the perfumed oil on them.
39  Seeing this, the Pharisee who had invited him said to himself: “If this man were really a prophet, he would know who and what kind of woman it is who is touching him, that she is a sinner.”
40  But in reply Jesus said to him: “Simon, I have something to say to you.” He said: “Teacher, say it!”
41  “Two men were debtors to a certain lender; the one was in debt for 500 de·narʹi·i, but the other for 50.
42  When they did not have anything to pay him back with, he freely forgave them both. Therefore, which one of them will love him more?”
43  In answer Simon said: “I suppose it is the one whom he forgave more.” He said to him: “You judged correctly.”
44  With that he turned to the woman and said to Simon: “Do you see this woman? I entered your house; you gave me no water for my feet. But this woman wet my feet with her tears and wiped them off with her hair.
45  You gave me no kiss, but this woman, from the hour that I came in, did not stop tenderly kissing my feet.
46  You did not pour oil on my head, but this woman poured perfumed oil on my feet.
47  Because of this, I tell you, her sins, many though they are, are forgiven, because she loved much. But the one who is forgiven little, loves little.”
48  Then he said to her: “Your sins are forgiven.”
49  Those reclining at the table with him started to say among themselves: “Who is this man who even forgives sins?”
50  But he said to the woman: “Your faith has saved you; go in peace.”
23  So the multitude got up, one and all, and led him to Pilate.
2  Then they began to accuse him, saying: “We found this man subverting our nation, forbidding the paying of taxes to Caesar, and saying he himself is Christ a king.”
3  Now Pilate asked him the question: “Are you the King of the Jews?” In answer he said: “You yourself are saying it.”
4  Then Pilate said to the chief priests and the crowds: “I find no crime in this man.”
5  But they insisted, saying: “He stirs up the people by teaching throughout all Ju·deʹa, starting from Galʹi·lee even to here.”
6  On hearing that, Pilate asked whether the man was a Gal·i·leʹan.
7  After ascertaining that he was under the jurisdiction of Herod, he sent him on to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem in those days.
8  When Herod saw Jesus, he rejoiced greatly. For a considerable time he had been wanting to see Jesus because he had heard much about him, and he was hoping to see some sign performed by him.
9  So he began to question him at length, but he gave him no answer.
10  However, the chief priests and the scribes kept standing up and vehemently accusing him.
11  Then Herod together with his soldiers treated him with contempt, and he mocked him by clothing him with a splendid garment and then sent him back to Pilate.
12  Herod and Pilate became friends with each other on that very day, for before that they had been at enmity with each other.
13  Pilate then called together the chief priests, the rulers, and the people
14  and said to them: “You brought this man to me as one inciting the people to revolt. Now look! I examined him in front of you but found in this man no grounds for the charges you are bringing against him.
15  In fact, neither did Herod, for he sent him back to us, and look! he has done nothing deserving of death.
16  I will therefore punish him and release him.”
17  ——
18  But the whole crowd shouted out: “Do away with this man, and release Bar·abʹbas to us!”
19  (This man had been thrown into prison for sedition that had occurred in the city and for murder.)
20  Again Pilate called out to them, because he wanted to release Jesus.
21  Then they began to yell, saying: “To the stake with him! To the stake with him!”
22  The third time he said to them: “Why? What bad thing did this man do? I found in him nothing deserving of death; I will therefore punish him and release him.”
23  At this they became insistent, demanding with loud voices that he be executed, and their voices prevailed.
24  So Pilate made the decision that their demand be met.
25  He released the man whom they were demanding, who had been thrown into prison for sedition and murder, but he surrendered Jesus to their will.
26  Now as they led him away, they seized a certain Simon of Cy·reʹne, who was coming from the countryside, and they placed the torture stake on him to carry it behind Jesus.
27  A large number of people were following him, including women who kept beating themselves in grief and wailing for him.
28  Jesus turned to the women and said: “Daughters of Jerusalem, stop weeping for me. Weep instead for yourselves and for your children;
29  for look! days are coming when people will say, ‘Happy are the barren women, the wombs that did not give birth and the breasts that did not nurse!’
30  Then they will start saying to the mountains, ‘Fall over us!’ and to the hills, ‘Cover us over!’
31  If they do these things when the tree is moist, what will occur when it is withered?”
32  Two other men, criminals, were also being led off to be executed with him.
33  And when they got to the place called Skull, they nailed him to the stake there alongside the criminals, one on his right and one on his left.
34  But Jesus was saying: “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing.” Furthermore, they cast lots to distribute his garments.
35  And the people stood looking on. But the rulers were sneering and saying: “Others he saved; let him save himself if he is the Christ of God, the Chosen One.”
36  Even the soldiers mocked him, coming up and offering him sour wine
37  and saying: “If you are the King of the Jews, save yourself.”
38  There was also an inscription over him: “This is the King of the Jews.”
39  Then one of the criminals hanging there began to speak abusively to him, saying: “You are the Christ, are you not? Save yourself and us too!”
40  In response the other rebuked him, saying: “Do you not fear God at all, now that you have received the same judgment?
41  And we rightly so, for we are getting back what we deserve for the things we did; but this man did nothing wrong.”
42  Then he said: “Jesus, remember me when you get into your Kingdom.”
43  And he said to him: “Truly I tell you today, you will be with me in Paradise.”
44  Well, by now it was about the sixth hour, and yet a darkness fell over all the land until the ninth hour,
45  because the sunlight failed; then the curtain of the sanctuary was torn down the middle.
46  And Jesus called out with a loud voice and said: “Father, into your hands I entrust my spirit.” After he said this, he expired.
47  Because of seeing what occurred, the army officer began to glorify God, saying: “Truly, this man was righteous.”
48  And when all the crowds that were gathered together there for this spectacle saw the things that occurred, they returned home, beating their chests.
49  And all those acquainted with him were standing at a distance. Also, women who had accompanied him from Galʹi·lee were there and saw these things.
50  And look! there was a man named Joseph, a member of the Council, who was a good and righteous man.
51  (This man had not voted in support of their scheme and action.) He was from Ar·i·ma·theʹa, a city of the Ju·deʹans, and was waiting for the Kingdom of God.
52  This man went in before Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.
53  And he took it down and wrapped it up in fine linen, and he laid it in a tomb carved in the rock, where no man had yet lain.
54  Now it was the day of Preparation, and the Sabbath was about to begin.
55  But the women who had come with him from Galʹi·lee followed along and took a look at the tomb and saw how his body was laid,
56  and they went back to prepare spices and perfumed oils. But, of course, they rested on the Sabbath according to the commandment.
22  Now the Festival of the Unleavened Bread, which is called Passover, was getting near.
2  And the chief priests and the scribes were looking for an effective way to get rid of him, because they were afraid of the people.
3  Then Satan entered into Judas, the one called Is·carʹi·ot, who was numbered among the Twelve,
4  and he went off and talked with the chief priests and temple captains about how to betray him to them.
5  They were delighted at this and agreed to give him silver money.
6  So he consented and began looking for a good opportunity to betray him to them without a crowd around.
7  The day of the Unleavened Bread now arrived, on which the Passover sacrifice must be offered;
8  so Jesus sent Peter and John, saying: “Go and get the Passover ready for us to eat.”
9  They said to him: “Where do you want us to get it ready?”
10  He said to them: “Look! When you enter into the city, a man carrying an earthenware water jar will meet you. Follow him into the house that he enters.
11  And say to the landlord of the house, ‘The Teacher says to you: “Where is the guest room where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?”’
12  And that man will show you a large, furnished upper room. Get it ready there.”
13  So they left and found it just as he had told them, and they prepared for the Passover.
14  So when the hour came, he reclined at the table along with the apostles.
15  And he said to them: “I have greatly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer;
16  for I tell you, I will not eat it again until it is fulfilled in the Kingdom of God.”
17  And accepting a cup, he gave thanks and said: “Take this and pass it from one to the other among yourselves,
18  for I tell you, from now on, I will not drink again from the product of the vine until the Kingdom of God comes.”
19  Also, he took a loaf, gave thanks, broke it, and gave it to them, saying: “This means my body, which is to be given in your behalf. Keep doing this in remembrance of me.”
20  Also, he did the same with the cup after they had the evening meal, saying: “This cup means the new covenant by virtue of my blood, which is to be poured out in your behalf.
21  “But look! the hand of my betrayer is with me at the table.
22  For, indeed, the Son of man is going his way according to what has been determined; all the same, woe to that man through whom he is betrayed!”
23  So they began to discuss among themselves which one of them could really be about to do this.
24  However, there also arose a heated dispute among them over which one of them was considered to be the greatest.
25  But he said to them: “The kings of the nations lord it over them, and those having authority over them are called Benefactors.
26  You, though, are not to be that way. But let the one who is the greatest among you become as the youngest, and the one taking the lead as the one ministering.
27  For which one is greater, the one dining or the one serving? Is it not the one dining? But I am among you as the one serving.
28  “However, you are the ones who have stuck with me in my trials;
29  and I make a covenant with you, just as my Father has made a covenant with me, for a kingdom,
30  so that you may eat and drink at my table in my Kingdom, and sit on thrones to judge the 12 tribes of Israel.
31  “Simon, Simon, look! Satan has demanded to have all of you to sift you as wheat.
32  But I have made supplication for you that your faith may not give out; and you, once you have returned, strengthen your brothers.”
33  Then he said to him: “Lord, I am ready to go with you both to prison and to death.”
34  But he said: “I tell you, Peter, a rooster will not crow today until you have denied knowing me three times.”
35  He also said to them: “When I sent you out without a money bag and a food pouch and sandals, you did not lack anything, did you?” They said: “No!”
36  Then he said to them: “But now let the one who has a money bag take it, likewise a food pouch, and let the one who has no sword sell his outer garment and buy one.
37  For I tell you that what is written must be accomplished in me, namely, ‘He was counted with lawless ones.’ For this is being fulfilled concerning me.”
38  Then they said: “Lord, look! here are two swords.” He said to them: “It is enough.”
39  On leaving, he went as was his custom to the Mount of Olives, and the disciples also followed him.
40  On arriving at the place, he said to them: “Carry on prayer so that you do not enter into temptation.”
41  And he withdrew from them about a stone’s throw away, and he bent his knees and began to pray,
42  saying: “Father, if you want to, remove this cup from me. Nevertheless, let, not my will, but yours take place.”
43  Then an angel from heaven appeared to him and strengthened him.
44  But he was in such agony that he kept praying more earnestly; and his sweat became as drops of blood falling to the ground.
45  When he rose from prayer and went to the disciples, he found them slumbering, exhausted from grief.
46  He said to them: “Why are you sleeping? Get up and keep praying, so that you do not enter into temptation.”
47  While he was still speaking, look! a crowd, and the man called Judas, one of the Twelve, was leading them, and he approached Jesus to kiss him.
48  But Jesus said to him: “Judas, are you betraying the Son of man with a kiss?”
49  When those around him saw what was going to happen, they said: “Lord, should we strike with the sword?”
50  One of them even struck the slave of the high priest, taking off his right ear.
51  But in reply Jesus said: “That is enough.” And he touched the ear and healed him.
52  Jesus then said to the chief priests and captains of the temple and elders who had come there for him: “Did you come out with swords and clubs as against a robber?
53  While I was with you in the temple day after day, you did not lay your hands on me. But this is your hour and the authority of darkness.”
54  Then they arrested him and led him off, and they brought him into the house of the high priest; but Peter was following at a distance.
55  When they lit a fire in the middle of the courtyard and sat down together, Peter was sitting among them.
56  But a servant girl, seeing him sitting in the light of the fire, looked closely at him and said: “This man was also with him.”
57  But he denied it, saying: “I do not know him, woman.”
58  After a short time another person saw him and said: “You too are one of them.” But Peter said: “Man, I am not.”
59  And after about an hour had passed, another man began insisting strongly: “Certainly this man was also with him, for he is, in fact, a Gal·i·leʹan!”
60  But Peter said: “Man, I do not know what you are saying.” And instantly, while he was still speaking, a rooster crowed.
61  At this the Lord turned and looked straight at Peter, and Peter recalled the statement of the Lord when he had said to him: “Before a rooster crows today, you will disown me three times.”
62  And he went outside and wept bitterly.
63  Now the men who held Jesus in custody began to mock him, hitting him;
64  and after covering his face, they kept asking: “Prophesy! Who is it that struck you?”
65  And they said many other blasphemous things against him.
66  And when it became day, the assembly of elders of the people, both chief priests and scribes, gathered together, and they led him into their Sanʹhe·drin hall and said:
67  “If you are the Christ, tell us.” But he said to them: “Even if I told you, you would not believe it at all.
68  Moreover, if I questioned you, you would not answer.
69  However, from now on the Son of man will be seated at the powerful right hand of God.”
70  At this they all said: “Are you, therefore, the Son of God?” He said to them: “You yourselves are saying that I am.”
71  They said: “Why do we need further testimony? For we ourselves have heard it out of his own mouth.”
6  Now on a sabbath he was passing through grainfields, and his disciples were plucking and eating the heads of grain, rubbing them with their hands.
2  At this some of the Pharisees said: “Why are you doing what is not lawful on the Sabbath?”
3  But in reply Jesus said to them: “Have you never read what David did when he and the men with him were hungry?
4  How he entered into the house of God and received the loaves of presentation and ate and gave some to the men with him, which it is not lawful for anyone to eat but for the priests only?”
5  Then he said to them: “The Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath.”
6  On another sabbath he entered the synagogue and began teaching. And a man was there whose right hand was withered.
7  The scribes and the Pharisees were now watching Jesus closely to see whether he would cure on the Sabbath, in order to find some way to accuse him.
8  He, however, knew their reasoning, so he said to the man with the withered hand: “Get up and stand in the center.” And he rose and stood there.
9  Then Jesus said to them: “I ask you men, Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good or to do harm, to save a life or to destroy it?”
10  After looking around at them all, he said to the man: “Stretch out your hand.” He did so, and his hand was restored.
11  But they flew into a senseless rage, and they began to talk over with one another what they might do to Jesus.
12  On one of those days he went out to the mountain to pray, and he spent the whole night in prayer to God.
13  And when it became day, he called his disciples to him and chose from among them 12, whom he also named apostles:
14  Simon, whom he also named Peter, Andrew his brother, James, John, Philip, Bar·tholʹo·mew,
15  Matthew, Thomas, James the son of Al·phaeʹus, Simon who is called “the zealous one,”
16  Judas the son of James, and Judas Is·carʹi·ot, who turned traitor.
17  And he came down with them and stood on a level place, and there was a large crowd of his disciples, and a great multitude of people from all Ju·deʹa and Jerusalem and the coastal region of Tyre and Siʹdon, who came to hear him and to be healed of their sicknesses.
18  Even those troubled with unclean spirits were cured.
19  And all the crowd were seeking to touch him, because power was going out of him and healing them all.
20  And he looked up at his disciples and began to say: “Happy are you who are poor, for yours is the Kingdom of God.
21  “Happy are you who hunger now, for you will be filled. “Happy are you who weep now, for you will laugh.
22  “Happy are you whenever men hate you, and when they exclude you and reproach you and denounce your name as wicked for the sake of the Son of man.
23  Rejoice in that day and leap for joy, for look! your reward is great in heaven, for those are the same things their forefathers used to do to the prophets.
24  “But woe to you who are rich, for you are having your consolation in full.
25  “Woe to you who are filled up now, for you will go hungry. “Woe, you who are laughing now, for you will mourn and weep.
26  “Woe whenever all men speak well of you, for this is what their forefathers did to the false prophets.
27  “But I say to you who are listening: Continue to love your enemies, to do good to those hating you,
28  to bless those cursing you, to pray for those who are insulting you.
29  To him who strikes you on the one cheek, offer the other also; and from him who takes away your outer garment, do not withhold the inner garment either.
30  Give to everyone asking you, and from the one taking your things away, do not ask them back.
31  “Also, just as you want men to do to you, do the same way to them.
32  “If you love those loving you, of what credit is it to you? For even the sinners love those loving them.
33  And if you do good to those doing good to you, of what credit is it to you? Even the sinners do the same.
34  Also, if you lend to those from whom you expect repayment, of what credit is it to you? Even sinners lend to sinners so that they may get back as much.
35  On the contrary, continue to love your enemies and to do good and to lend without hoping for anything back; and your reward will be great, and you will be sons of the Most High, for he is kind toward the unthankful and wicked.
36  Continue being merciful, just as your Father is merciful.
37  “Moreover, stop judging, and you will by no means be judged; and stop condemning, and you will by no means be condemned. Keep on forgiving, and you will be forgiven.
38  Practice giving, and people will give to you. They will pour into your laps a fine measure, pressed down, shaken together, and overflowing. For with the measure that you are measuring out, they will measure out to you in return.”
39  Then he also told them an illustration: “A blind man cannot guide a blind man, can he? Both will fall into a pit, will they not?
40  A student is not above his teacher, but everyone who is perfectly instructed will be like his teacher.
41  Why, then, do you look at the straw in your brother’s eye but do not notice the rafter in your own eye?
42  How can you say to your brother, ‘Brother, allow me to remove the straw that is in your eye,’ while you yourself do not see the rafter in your own eye? Hypocrite! First remove the rafter from your own eye, and then you will see clearly how to remove the straw that is in your brother’s eye.
43  “For no fine tree produces rotten fruit, and no rotten tree produces fine fruit.
44  For each tree is known by its own fruit. For example, people do not gather figs from thorns, nor do they cut grapes off a thornbush.
45  A good man brings good out of the good treasure of his heart, but a wicked man brings what is wicked out of his wicked treasure; for out of the heart’s abundance his mouth speaks.
46  “Why, then, do you call me ‘Lord! Lord!’ but do not do the things I say?
47  Everyone who comes to me and hears my words and does them, I will show you whom he is like:
48  He is like a man who in building a house dug and went down deep and laid a foundation on the rock. Consequently, when a flood came, the river dashed against that house but was not strong enough to shake it, for it was well-built.
49  On the other hand, whoever hears and does nothing is like a man who built a house on the ground without a foundation. The river dashed against it, and immediately it collapsed, and the ruin of that house was great.”
21  Now as he looked up, he saw the rich dropping their gifts into the treasury chests.
2  Then he saw a needy widow drop in two small coins of very little value,
3  and he said: “Truly I say to you that this poor widow put in more than they all did.
4  For all of these put in gifts out of their surplus, but she, out of her want, put in all the means of living she had.”
5  Later, when some were speaking about the temple, how it was adorned with fine stones and dedicated things,
6  he said: “As for these things that you now see, the days will come when not a stone will be left upon a stone and not be thrown down.”
7  Then they questioned him, saying: “Teacher, when will these things actually be, and what will be the sign when these things are to occur?”
8  He said: “Look out that you are not misled, for many will come on the basis of my name, saying, ‘I am he,’ and, ‘The due time is near.’ Do not go after them.
9  Furthermore, when you hear of wars and disturbances, do not be terrified. For these things must take place first, but the end will not occur immediately.”
10  Then he said to them: “Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
11  There will be great earthquakes, and in one place after another food shortages and pestilences; and there will be fearful sights and from heaven great signs.
12  “But before all these things happen, people will lay their hands on you and persecute you, handing you over to the synagogues and prisons. You will be brought before kings and governors for the sake of my name.
13  It will result in your giving a witness.
14  Therefore, resolve in your hearts not to rehearse beforehand how to make your defense,
15  for I will give you words and wisdom that all your opposers together will not be able to resist or dispute.
16  Moreover, you will be handed over even by parents and brothers and relatives and friends, and they will put some of you to death,
17  and you will be hated by all people because of my name.
18  But not even a hair of your heads will perish.
19  By your endurance you will preserve your lives.
20  “However, when you see Jerusalem surrounded by encamped armies, then know that the desolating of her has drawn near.
21  Then let those in Ju·deʹa begin fleeing to the mountains, let those in the midst of her leave, and let those in the countryside not enter into her,
22  because these are days for meting out justice in order that all the things written may be fulfilled.
23  Woe to the pregnant women and those nursing a baby in those days! For there will be great distress on the land and wrath against this people.
24  And they will fall by the edge of the sword and be led captive into all the nations; and Jerusalem will be trampled on by the nations until the appointed times of the nations are fulfilled.
25  “Also, there will be signs in the sun and moon and stars, and on the earth anguish of nations not knowing the way out because of the roaring of the sea and its agitation.
26  People will become faint out of fear and expectation of the things coming upon the inhabited earth, for the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
27  And then they will see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.
28  But as these things start to occur, stand up straight and lift up your heads, because your deliverance is getting near.”
29  With that he told them an illustration: “Notice the fig tree and all the other trees.
30  When they are budding, you see it for yourselves and know that now the summer is near.
31  Likewise also you, when you see these things happening, know that the Kingdom of God is near.
32  Truly I say to you that this generation will by no means pass away until all things happen.
33  Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will by no means pass away.
34  “But pay attention to yourselves that your hearts never become weighed down with overeating and heavy drinking and anxieties of life, and suddenly that day be instantly upon you
35  as a snare. For it will come upon all those dwelling on the face of the whole earth.
36  Keep awake, then, all the time making supplication that you may succeed in escaping all these things that must occur and in standing before the Son of man.”
37  So by day he would be teaching in the temple, but by night he would go out and lodge on the mountain called the Mount of Olives.
38  And all the people would come to him early in the morning to hear him in the temple.
13  At that time some who were present reported to him about the Gal·i·leʹans whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices.
2  In reply he said to them: “Do you think that those Gal·i·leʹans were worse sinners than all other Gal·i·leʹans because they have suffered these things?
3  No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all likewise be destroyed.
4  Or those 18 on whom the tower in Si·loʹam fell, killing them—do you think that they had greater guilt than all other men who live in Jerusalem?
5  No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all be destroyed, as they were.”
6  Then he went on to tell this illustration: “A man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came looking for fruit on it but found none.
7  Then he said to the vinedresser, ‘Here it is three years that I have come looking for fruit on this fig tree, but have found none. Cut it down! Why should it keep the ground useless?’
8  In reply he said to him, ‘Master, leave it alone for one more year until I dig around it and put on manure.
9  If it produces fruit in the future, well and good; but if not, then cut it down.’”
10  Now he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath.
11  And look! a woman was there who had had a spirit of weakness for 18 years; and she was bent double and was unable to straighten up at all.
12  When he saw her, Jesus addressed her and said: “Woman, you are released from your weakness.”
13  And he laid his hands on her, and instantly she straightened up and began to glorify God.
14  But in response the presiding officer of the synagogue, indignant because Jesus did the cure on the Sabbath, said to the crowd: “There are six days on which work ought to be done; so come and be cured on those days, and not on the Sabbath day.”
15  However, the Lord answered him: “Hypocrites, does not each one of you on the Sabbath untie his bull or his donkey from the stall and lead it away to give it something to drink?
16  Should not this woman, who is a daughter of Abraham and whom Satan held bound for 18 years, be released from this bondage on the Sabbath day?”
17  Well, when he said these things, all his opposers began to feel shame, but the entire crowd began to rejoice at all the glorious things he did.
18  So he went on to say: “What is the Kingdom of God like, and with what can I compare it?
19  It is like a mustard grain that a man took and planted in his garden, and it grew and became a tree, and the birds of heaven nested in its branches.”
20  And again he said: “With what can I compare the Kingdom of God?
21  It is like leaven that a woman took and mixed with three large measures of flour until the whole mass was fermented.”
22  And he traveled from city to city and from village to village, teaching and continuing on his journey to Jerusalem.
23  Now a man said to him: “Lord, are those being saved few?” He said to them:
24  “Exert yourselves vigorously to get in through the narrow door, because many, I tell you, will seek to get in but will not be able.
25  When the householder gets up and locks the door, you will stand outside knocking at the door, saying, ‘Lord, open to us.’ But in answer he will say to you: ‘I do not know where you are from.’
26  Then you will start saying, ‘We ate and drank in your presence, and you taught in our main streets.’
27  But he will say to you, ‘I do not know where you are from. Get away from me, all you workers of unrighteousness!’
28  There is where your weeping and the gnashing of your teeth will be, when you see Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the prophets in the Kingdom of God, but you yourselves thrown outside.
29  Furthermore, people will come from east and west and from north and south, and will recline at the table in the Kingdom of God.
30  And look! there are those last who will be first, and there are those first who will be last.”
31  In that very hour some of the Pharisees came up and told him: “Get out and go away from here, because Herod wants to kill you.”
32  And he said to them: “Go and tell that fox, ‘Look! I am casting out demons and healing people today and tomorrow, and on the third day I will be finished.’
33  Nevertheless, I must go on today, tomorrow, and the following day, because it cannot be that a prophet should be put to death outside of Jerusalem.
34  Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the killer of the prophets and stoner of those sent to her—how often I wanted to gather your children together the way a hen gathers her brood of chicks under her wings! But you did not want it.
35  Look! Your house is abandoned to you. I tell you, you will by no means see me until you say: ‘Blessed is the one who comes in Jehovah’s name!’”
14  On another occasion he went to eat a meal in the house of one of the leaders of the Pharisees on the Sabbath, and they were closely watching him.
2  And look! a man who had dropsy was in front of him.
3  So in response Jesus asked those versed in the Law and the Pharisees: “Is it lawful to cure on the Sabbath or not?”
4  But they kept silent. With that he took hold of the man, healed him, and sent him away.
5  Then he said to them: “Who of you, if his son or bull falls into a well, will not immediately pull him out on the Sabbath day?”
6  And they were not able to reply to this.
7  He then told the invited men an illustration when he noticed how they were choosing the most prominent places for themselves. He said to them:
8  “When you are invited by someone to a marriage feast, do not recline in the most prominent place. Perhaps someone more distinguished than you may also have been invited.
9  Then the one who invited you both will come and say to you, ‘Let this man have your place.’ Then you will proceed with shame to take the lowest place.
10  But when you are invited, go and recline in the lowest place, so that when the man who invited you comes, he will say to you, ‘Friend, go on up higher.’ Then you will have honor in front of all your fellow guests.
11  For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.”
12  Next he said also to the man who had invited him: “When you spread a dinner or an evening meal, do not call your friends or your brothers or your relatives or your rich neighbors. Otherwise, they might also invite you in return, and it would become a repayment to you.
13  But when you spread a feast, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind;
14  and you will be happy, because they have nothing with which to repay you. For you will be repaid in the resurrection of the righteous ones.”
15  On hearing these things, one of the fellow guests said to him: “Happy is the one who dines in the Kingdom of God.”
16  Jesus said to him: “A man was spreading a grand evening meal, and he invited many.
17  He sent his slave out at the hour of the evening meal to say to the invited ones, ‘Come, because everything is now ready.’
18  But they all alike began to make excuses. The first said to him, ‘I bought a field and need to go out and see it; I ask you, have me excused.’
19  And another said, ‘I bought five yoke of cattle and am going to examine them; I ask you, have me excused.’
20  Still another said, ‘I just got married, and for this reason I cannot come.’
21  So the slave came and reported these things to his master. Then the master of the house became angry and said to his slave, ‘Go out quickly to the main streets and the alleys of the city, and bring in here the poor and crippled and blind and lame.’
22  In time the slave said, ‘Master, what you ordered has been done, and still there is room.’
23  So the master said to the slave, ‘Go out to the roads and the lanes and compel them to come in, so that my house may be filled.
24  For I say to you, none of those men who were invited will taste my evening meal.’”
25  Now large crowds were traveling with him, and he turned and said to them:
26  “If anyone comes to me and does not hate his father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, yes, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple.
27  Whoever does not carry his torture stake and come after me cannot be my disciple.
28  For example, who of you wanting to build a tower does not first sit down and calculate the expense to see if he has enough to complete it?
29  Otherwise, he might lay its foundation but not be able to finish it, and all the onlookers would start to ridicule him,
30  saying: ‘This man started to build but was not able to finish.’
31  Or what king marching out against another king in war does not first sit down and take counsel whether he is able with 10,000 troops to stand up to the one who comes against him with 20,000?
32  If, in fact, he cannot do so, then while that one is yet far away, he sends out a body of ambassadors and sues for peace.
33  In the same way, you may be sure that not one of you who does not say good-bye to all his belongings can be my disciple.
34  “Salt, to be sure, is fine. But if the salt loses its strength, with what will it be seasoned?
35  It is not suitable for soil or for manure. People throw it away. Let the one who has ears to listen, listen.”
19  He then entered Jerʹi·cho and was passing through.
2  Now a man named Zac·chaeʹus was there; he was a chief tax collector, and he was rich.
3  Well, he was trying to see who this Jesus was, but he could not see because of the crowd, since he was short.
4  So he ran ahead and climbed a sycamore tree in order to see him, for he was about to pass that way.
5  Now when Jesus got to the place, he looked up and said to him: “Zac·chaeʹus, hurry and get down, for today I must stay in your house.”
6  With that he hurried down and joyfully welcomed him as a guest.
7  When they saw this, they were all muttering: “He went as a guest to the house of a man who is a sinner.”
8  But Zac·chaeʹus stood up and said to the Lord: “Look! The half of my belongings, Lord, I am giving to the poor, and whatever I extorted from anyone, I am restoring four times over.”
9  At this Jesus said to him: “Today salvation has come to this house, because he too is a son of Abraham.
10  For the Son of man came to seek and to save what was lost.”
11  While they were listening to these things, he told another illustration, because he was near Jerusalem and they thought that the Kingdom of God was going to appear instantly.
12  So he said: “A man of noble birth traveled to a distant land to secure kingly power for himself and to return.
13  Calling ten of his slaves, he gave them ten miʹnas and told them, ‘Do business with these until I come.’
14  But his citizens hated him and sent out a body of ambassadors after him to say, ‘We do not want this man to become king over us.’
15  “When he eventually got back after having secured the kingly power, he summoned the slaves to whom he had given the money, in order to ascertain what they had gained by their business activity.
16  So the first one came forward and said, ‘Lord, your miʹna gained ten miʹnas.’
17  He said to him, ‘Well done, good slave! Because in a very small matter you have proved yourself faithful, hold authority over ten cities.’
18  Now the second came, saying, ‘Your miʹna, Lord, made five miʹnas.’
19  He said to this one as well, ‘You too be in charge of five cities.’
20  But another one came, saying, ‘Lord, here is your miʹna that I kept hidden away in a cloth.
21  You see, I was in fear of you, because you are a harsh man; you take what you did not deposit, and you reap what you did not sow.’
22  He said to him, ‘By your own words I judge you, wicked slave. You knew, did you, that I am a harsh man, taking what I did not deposit and reaping what I did not sow?
23  So why did you not put my money in a bank? Then on my coming, I would have collected it with interest.’
24  “With that he said to those standing by, ‘Take the miʹna from him and give it to the one who has the ten miʹnas.’
25  But they said to him, ‘Lord, he has ten miʹnas!’—
26  ‘I say to you, to everyone who has, more will be given, but from the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away.
27  Moreover, bring these enemies of mine here who did not want me to become king over them and execute them in front of me.’”
28  After he had said these things, he went on ahead, going up to Jerusalem.
29  And when he got near to Bethʹpha·ge and Bethʹa·ny at the mountain called Mount of Olives, he sent two of the disciples,
30  saying: “Go into the village that is within sight, and after you enter it, you will find a colt tied, on which no man has ever sat. Untie it and bring it here.
31  But if anyone asks you, ‘Why are you untying it?’ you must say, ‘The Lord needs it.’”
32  So those who were sent went away and found it just as he had said to them.
33  But as they were untying the colt, its owners said to them: “Why are you untying the colt?”
34  They said: “The Lord needs it.”
35  And they led it to Jesus, and they threw their outer garments on the colt and seated Jesus on it.
36  As he moved along, they were spreading their outer garments on the road.
37  As soon as he got near the road down the Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and to praise God with a loud voice because of all the powerful works they had seen,
38  saying: “Blessed is the one coming as the King in Jehovah’s name! Peace in heaven, and glory in the heights above!”
39  However, some of the Pharisees from the crowd said to him: “Teacher, rebuke your disciples.”
40  But in reply he said: “I tell you, if these remained silent, the stones would cry out.”
41  And when he got nearby, he viewed the city and wept over it,
42  saying: “If you, even you, had discerned on this day the things having to do with peace—but now they have been hidden from your eyes.
43  Because the days will come upon you when your enemies will build around you a fortification of pointed stakes and will encircle you and besiege you from every side.
44  They will dash you and your children within you to the ground, and they will not leave a stone upon a stone in you, because you did not discern the time of your being inspected.”
45  Then he entered the temple and started to throw out those who were selling,
46  saying to them: “It is written, ‘My house will be a house of prayer,’ but you have made it a cave of robbers.”
47  He continued teaching daily in the temple. But the chief priests and the scribes and the principal ones of the people were seeking to kill him;
48  but they did not find any way to do this, for the people one and all kept hanging on to him to hear him.
24  But on the first day of the week, they came very early to the tomb, bringing the spices they had prepared.
2  But they found the stone rolled away from the tomb,
3  and when they entered, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus.
4  While they were perplexed about this, look! two men in shining garments stood by them.
5  The women became frightened and kept their faces turned toward the ground, so the men said to them: “Why are you looking for the living one among the dead?
6  He is not here, but has been raised up. Recall how he spoke to you while he was yet in Galʹi·lee,
7  saying that the Son of man must be handed over to sinful men and be executed on the stake and on the third day rise.”
8  Then they remembered his words,
9  and they returned from the tomb and reported all these things to the Eleven and to all the rest.
10  They were Mary Magʹda·lene, Jo·anʹna, and Mary the mother of James. Also, the rest of the women with them were telling these things to the apostles.
11  However, these sayings seemed like nonsense to them, and they would not believe the women.
12  But Peter got up and ran to the tomb, and stooping forward, he saw only the linen cloths. So he went off, wondering to himself what had occurred.
13  But look! on that very day, two of them were traveling to a village named Em·maʹus, about seven miles from Jerusalem,
14  and they were conversing with each other about all these things that had happened.
15  Now as they were conversing and discussing these things, Jesus himself approached and began walking with them,
16  but their eyes were kept from recognizing him.
17  He said to them: “What are these matters that you are debating between yourselves as you walk along?” And they stood still, looking sad.
18  In answer the one named Cleʹo·pas said to him: “Are you a stranger dwelling alone in Jerusalem and do not know the things that have occurred there during these days?”
19  He asked them: “What things?” They said to him: “The things concerning Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ, who proved to be a prophet powerful in deed and word before God and all the people;
20  and how our chief priests and rulers handed him over to be sentenced to death, and they nailed him to the stake.
21  But we were hoping that this man was the one who was going to deliver Israel. Yes, and besides all these things, this is the third day since these things occurred.
22  Moreover, some women from among us also astonished us, for they went early to the tomb
23  and when they did not find his body, they came saying that they had also seen a supernatural sight of angels, who said he is alive.
24  Then some of those who were with us went off to the tomb, and they found it just as the women had said, but they did not see him.”
25  So he said to them: “O senseless ones and slow of heart to believe all the things the prophets have spoken!
26  Was it not necessary for the Christ to suffer these things and to enter into his glory?”
27  And starting with Moses and all the Prophets, he interpreted to them things pertaining to himself in all the Scriptures.
28  Finally they got close to the village to which they were traveling, and he made as if to travel on farther.
29  But they urged him to remain, saying: “Stay with us, because it is almost evening and the day is nearly over.” With that he went in to stay with them.
30  And as he was dining with them, he took the bread, blessed it, broke it, and began handing it to them.
31  At that their eyes were fully opened and they recognized him; but he disappeared from them.
32  And they said to each other: “Were not our hearts burning within us as he was speaking to us on the road, as he was fully opening up the Scriptures to us?”
33  And they got up in that very hour and returned to Jerusalem, and they found the Eleven and those assembled together with them,
34  who said: “For a fact the Lord was raised up, and he appeared to Simon!”
35  Then they related the events on the road and how he became known to them by the breaking of the bread.
36  While they were speaking of these things, he himself stood in their midst and said to them: “May you have peace.”
37  But because they were terrified and frightened, they imagined that they were seeing a spirit.
38  So he said to them: “Why are you troubled, and why have doubts come up in your hearts?
39  See my hands and my feet, that it is I myself; touch me and see, for a spirit does not have flesh and bones just as you see that I have.”
40  And as he said this, he showed them his hands and his feet.
41  But while they were still not believing for sheer joy and amazement, he said to them: “Do you have something there to eat?”
42  So they handed him a piece of broiled fish,
43  and he took it and ate it before their eyes.
44  He then said to them: “These are my words that I spoke to you while I was yet with you, that all the things written about me in the Law of Moses and in the Prophets and Psalms must be fulfilled.”
45  Then he opened up their minds fully to grasp the meaning of the Scriptures,
46  and he said to them, “This is what is written: that the Christ would suffer and rise from among the dead on the third day,
47  and on the basis of his name, repentance for forgiveness of sins would be preached in all the nations—starting out from Jerusalem.
48  You are to be witnesses of these things.
49  And look! I am sending upon you what my Father promised. You, though, stay in the city until you are clothed with power from on high.”
50  Then he led them out as far as Bethʹa·ny, and he lifted up his hands and blessed them.
51  As he was blessing them, he was parted from them and taken up to heaven.
52  And they did obeisance to him and returned to Jerusalem with great joy.
53  And they were continually in the temple, praising God.
5  On one occasion when the crowd was pressing in on him and listening to the word of God, he was standing by the lake of Gen·nesʹa·ret.
2  And he saw two boats docked at the lakeside, but the fishermen had got out of them and were washing off their nets.
3  Going aboard one of the boats, which was Simon’s, he asked him to pull away a bit from land. Then he sat down, and he began teaching the crowds from the boat.
4  When he stopped speaking, he said to Simon: “Pull out to where it is deep, and let down your nets for a catch.”
5  But in reply Simon said: “Instructor, we toiled all night and caught nothing, but at your word I will lower the nets.”
6  Well, when they did this, they caught a great number of fish. In fact, their nets began ripping apart.
7  So they motioned to their partners in the other boat to come and assist them, and they came and filled both boats, so that these began to sink.
8  Seeing this, Simon Peter fell down at the knees of Jesus, saying: “Depart from me, Lord, because I am a sinful man.”
9  For both he and those with him were overwhelmed with astonishment at the catch of fish they had taken,
10  and the same was true of both James and John, Zebʹe·dee’s sons, who were partners with Simon. But Jesus said to Simon: “Stop being afraid. From now on you will be catching men alive.”
11  So they brought the boats back to land and abandoned everything and followed him.
12  On another occasion while he was in one of the cities, look! there was a man full of leprosy! When he caught sight of Jesus, he fell facedown and begged him: “Lord, if you just want to, you can make me clean.”
13  So stretching out his hand, he touched him, saying: “I want to! Be made clean.” Immediately the leprosy vanished from him.
14  Then he gave the man orders to tell no one: “But go and show yourself to the priest, and make an offering for your cleansing, just as Moses directed, for a witness to them.”
15  But the news about him just kept spreading, and large crowds would gather together to listen and to be cured of their sicknesses.
16  However, he often went into the desolate areas to pray.
17  On one of those days while he was teaching, Pharisees and teachers of the Law who had come out of every village of Galʹi·lee and Ju·deʹa and from Jerusalem were sitting there; and Jehovah’s power was with him to do healing.
18  And look! men were carrying a paralyzed man on a stretcher, and they were trying to bring him in and place him before Jesus.
19  So not finding a way to bring him in because of the crowd, they climbed up to the roof, and they lowered him on the stretcher through the tiling, right among those in front of Jesus.
20  When he saw their faith, he said: “Man, your sins are forgiven.”
21  Then the scribes and the Pharisees started to reason, saying: “Who is this who speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins except God alone?”
22  But Jesus, discerning their reasoning, said in answer to them: “What are you reasoning in your hearts?
23  Which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up and walk’?
24  But in order for you to know that the Son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins—” he said to the paralyzed man: “I say to you, Get up, pick up your stretcher, and go to your home.”
25  At that he stood up before them, picked up what he had been lying on, and went to his home, glorifying God.
26  Then one and all were seized with amazement, and they began to glorify God, and they became filled with awe, saying: “We have seen wonderful things today!”
27  Now after this, he went out and saw a tax collector named Leʹvi sitting at the tax office, and he said to him: “Be my follower.”
28  And leaving everything behind, he rose up and began to follow him.
29  Then Leʹvi spread a big reception feast for him in his house, and there was a large crowd of tax collectors and others who were dining with them.
30  At this the Pharisees and their scribes began murmuring to his disciples, saying: “Why do you eat and drink with tax collectors and sinners?”
31  In reply Jesus said to them: “Those who are healthy do not need a physician, but those who are ill do.
32  I have come to call, not righteous people, but sinners to repentance.”
33  They said to him: “John’s disciples fast frequently and offer supplications, and so do those of the Pharisees, but yours eat and drink.”
34  Jesus said to them: “You cannot make the friends of the bridegroom fast while the bridegroom is with them, can you?
35  But days will come when the bridegroom will indeed be taken away from them; then they will fast in those days.”
36  He also gave an illustration to them: “Nobody cuts a patch from a new outer garment and sews it on an old garment. If he does, then the new patch tears away and the patch from the new garment does not match the old.
37  Also, no one puts new wine into old wineskins. If he does, the new wine will burst the wineskins and it will be spilled out and the wineskins will be ruined.
38  But new wine must be put into new wineskins.
39  No one after drinking old wine wants new, for he says, ‘The old is nice.’”
15  Now all the tax collectors and the sinners kept gathering around him to hear him.
2  And both the Pharisees and the scribes kept muttering: “This man welcomes sinners and eats with them.”
3  Then he told them this illustration, saying:
4  “What man among you with 100 sheep, on losing one of them, will not leave the 99 behind in the wilderness and go after the lost one until he finds it?
5  And when he has found it, he puts it on his shoulders and rejoices.
6  And when he gets home, he calls his friends and his neighbors together, saying to them, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep that was lost.’
7  I tell you that in the same way, there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over 99 righteous ones who have no need of repentance.
8  “Or what woman who has ten drachma coins, if she loses one of the drachmas, does not light a lamp and sweep her house and search carefully until she finds it?
9  And when she has found it, she calls her friends and neighbors together, saying, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found the drachma coin that I had lost.’
10  In the same way, I tell you, joy arises among the angels of God over one sinner who repents.”
11  Then he said: “A man had two sons.
12  And the younger one said to his father, ‘Father, give me the share of the property that should come to me.’ So he divided his belongings between them.
13  A few days later, the younger son gathered all his things together and traveled to a distant country and there squandered his property by living a debauched life.
14  When he had spent everything, a severe famine occurred throughout that country, and he fell into need.
15  He even went and attached himself to one of the citizens of that country, who sent him into his fields to herd swine.
16  And he longed to be filled with the carob pods that the swine were eating, but no one would give him anything.
17  “When he came to his senses, he said, ‘How many of my father’s hired men have more than enough bread, while I am dying here from hunger!
18  I will get up and travel to my father and say to him: “Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you.
19  I am no longer worthy of being called your son. Make me as one of your hired men.”’
20  So he got up and went to his father. While he was still a long way off, his father caught sight of him and was moved with pity, and he ran and embraced him and tenderly kissed him.
21  Then the son said to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. I am no longer worthy of being called your son.’
22  But the father said to his slaves, ‘Quick! bring out a robe, the best one, and clothe him with it, and put a ring on his hand and sandals on his feet.
23  Also bring the fattened calf, slaughter it, and let us eat and celebrate,
24  for this son of mine was dead but has come to life again; he was lost and has been found.’ And they started to enjoy themselves.
25  “Now his older son was in the field, and as he returned and got near the house, he heard music and dancing.
26  So he called one of the servants to him and asked what was happening.
27  He said to him, ‘Your brother has come, and your father slaughtered the fattened calf because he got him back in good health.’
28  But he became angry and refused to go in. Then his father came out and began to plead with him.
29  In reply he said to his father, ‘Look! These many years I have slaved for you and never once did I disobey your orders, and yet you never once gave me a young goat to enjoy with my friends.
30  But as soon as this son of yours arrived who squandered your belongings with prostitutes, you slaughtered the fattened calf for him.’
31  Then he said to him, ‘My son, you have always been with me, and all the things that are mine are yours.
32  But we just had to celebrate and rejoice, for your brother was dead but has come to life; he was lost and has been found.’”
20  On one of the days while he was teaching the people in the temple and declaring the good news, the chief priests and the scribes with the elders came
2  and said to him: “Tell us, by what authority do you do these things? Or who gave you this authority?”
3  He replied to them: “I will also ask you a question, and you tell me:
4  Was the baptism of John from heaven or from men?”
5  Then they drew conclusions among themselves, saying: “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Why did you not believe him?’
6  But if we say, ‘From men,’ the people one and all will stone us, for they are convinced that John was a prophet.”
7  So they replied that they did not know its source.
8  Jesus said to them: “Neither am I telling you by what authority I do these things.”
9  Then he began to tell the people this illustration: “A man planted a vineyard and leased it to cultivators, and he traveled abroad for a considerable time.
10  In due season he sent a slave to the cultivators so that they would give him some of the fruit of the vineyard. The cultivators, however, sent him away empty-handed, after beating him.
11  But again he sent another slave. That one also they beat and humiliated and sent away empty-handed.
12  Yet again he sent a third; this one also they wounded and threw out.
13  At this the owner of the vineyard said, ‘What should I do? I will send my son, the beloved. They will likely respect this one.’
14  When the cultivators caught sight of him, they reasoned with one another, saying, ‘This is the heir. Let us kill him so that the inheritance may become ours.’
15  So they threw him out of the vineyard and killed him. What, then, will the owner of the vineyard do to them?
16  He will come and kill these cultivators and will give the vineyard to others.” On hearing this, they said: “Never may that happen!”
17  But he looked straight at them and said: “What, then, does this mean where it is written: ‘The stone that the builders rejected, this has become the chief cornerstone’?
18  Everyone falling on that stone will be shattered. As for anyone on whom it falls, it will crush him.”
19  The scribes and the chief priests then sought to get their hands on him in that very hour, but they feared the people, for they realized that he told this illustration with them in mind.
20  And after observing him closely, they sent men whom they had secretly hired to pretend that they were righteous in order to catch him in his speech, so as to turn him over to the government and to the authority of the governor.
21  And they questioned him, saying: “Teacher, we know you speak and teach correctly and show no partiality, but you teach the way of God in line with truth:
22  Is it lawful for us to pay head tax to Caesar or not?”
23  But he detected their cunning and said to them:
24  “Show me a de·narʹi·us. Whose image and inscription does it have?” They said: “Caesar’s.”
25  He said to them: “By all means, then, pay back Caesar’s things to Caesar but God’s things to God.”
26  Well, they were not able to trap him in his speech before the people, but amazed at his answer, they became silent.
27  However, some of the Sadducees, those who say there is no resurrection, came and asked him:
28  “Teacher, Moses wrote us, ‘If a man’s brother dies, leaving a wife, but he was childless, his brother should take the wife and raise up offspring for his brother.’
29  Now there were seven brothers. The first took a wife but died childless.
30  So the second
31  and the third married her. Likewise even all seven; they died and left no children.
32  Finally the woman also died.
33  Consequently, in the resurrection, whose wife will she become? For the seven had her as a wife.”
34  Jesus said to them: “The children of this system of things marry and are given in marriage,
35  but those who have been counted worthy of gaining that system of things and the resurrection from the dead neither marry nor are given in marriage.
36  In fact, neither can they die anymore, for they are like the angels, and they are God’s children by being children of the resurrection.
37  But that the dead are raised up, even Moses made known in the account about the thornbush, when he calls Jehovah ‘the God of Abraham and God of Isaac and God of Jacob.’
38  He is a God, not of the dead, but of the living, for they are all living to him.”
39  In response some of the scribes said: “Teacher, you spoke well.”
40  For they no longer had the courage to ask him a single question.
41  In turn he asked them: “How is it they say that the Christ is David’s son?
42  For David himself says in the book of Psalms, ‘Jehovah said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand
43  until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.”’
44  David, therefore, calls him Lord; so how is he his son?”
45  Then, while all the people were listening, he said to his disciples:
46  “Beware of the scribes who like to walk around in robes and who love greetings in the marketplaces and front seats in the synagogues and the most prominent places at evening meals,
47  and who devour the houses of the widows and for show make long prayers. These will receive a more severe judgment.”
1  Seeing that many have undertaken to compile an account of the facts that are given full credence among us,
2  just as these were handed down to us by those who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and attendants of the message,
3  I resolved also, because I have traced all things from the start with accuracy, to write them to you in logical order, most excellent The·ophʹi·lus,
4  so that you may know fully the certainty of the things that you have been taught orally.
5  In the days of Herod, king of Ju·deʹa, there was a priest named Zech·a·riʹah of the division of A·biʹjah. His wife was from the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth.
6  They both were righteous before God, walking blamelessly in accord with all the commandments and legal requirements of Jehovah.
7  But they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren, and they both were well along in years.
8  Now as he was serving as priest in the assignment of his division before God,
9  according to the established practice of the priesthood it became his turn to offer incense when he entered into the sanctuary of Jehovah.
10  And the entire multitude of the people were praying outside at the hour of offering incense.
11  Jehovah’s angel appeared to him, standing at the right side of the incense altar.
12  But Zech·a·riʹah became troubled at the sight, and he was overcome with fear.
13  However, the angel said to him: “Do not be afraid, Zech·a·riʹah, because your supplication has been favorably heard, and your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you are to name him John.
14  You will have joy and great gladness, and many will rejoice over his birth,
15  for he will be great in the sight of Jehovah. But he must drink no wine or any alcoholic drink at all, and he will be filled with holy spirit even from before birth,
16  and he will turn back many of the sons of Israel to Jehovah their God.
17  Also, he will go ahead of him with E·liʹjah’s spirit and power, to turn back the hearts of fathers to children and the disobedient ones to the practical wisdom of righteous ones, in order to get ready for Jehovah a prepared people.”
18  Zech·a·riʹah said to the angel: “How can I be sure of this? For I am old, and my wife is well along in years.”
19  In reply the angel said to him: “I am Gaʹbri·el, who stands near before God, and I was sent to speak with you and to declare this good news to you.
20  But look! you will be silent and unable to speak until the day these things take place, because you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their appointed time.”
21  Meanwhile, the people continued waiting for Zech·a·riʹah, and they were surprised that he delayed so long in the sanctuary.
22  When he came out, he was unable to speak to them, and they perceived that he had just seen a supernatural sight in the sanctuary. He kept making signs to them but remained speechless.
23  When the days of his holy service were completed, he went off to his home.
24  Some days later Elizabeth his wife became pregnant, and she kept herself secluded for five months, saying:
25  “This is how Jehovah has dealt with me in these days. He has turned his attention to me to take away my reproach among men.”
26  In her sixth month, the angel Gaʹbri·el was sent from God to a city of Galʹi·lee named Nazʹa·reth,
27  to a virgin promised in marriage to a man named Joseph of David’s house, and the name of the virgin was Mary.
28  And coming in, the angel said to her: “Greetings, you highly favored one, Jehovah is with you.”
29  But she was deeply disturbed at his words and tried to understand what kind of greeting this might be.
30  So the angel said to her: “Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God.
31  And look! you will become pregnant and give birth to a son, and you are to name him Jesus.
32  This one will be great and will be called Son of the Most High, and Jehovah God will give him the throne of David his father,
33  and he will rule as King over the house of Jacob forever, and there will be no end to his Kingdom.”
34  But Mary said to the angel: “How is this to be, since I am not having sexual relations with a man?”
35  In answer the angel said to her: “Holy spirit will come upon you, and power of the Most High will overshadow you. And for that reason the one who is born will be called holy, God’s Son.
36  And look! Elizabeth your relative has also conceived a son, in her old age, and this is the sixth month for her, the so-called barren woman;
37  for no declaration will be impossible for God.”
38  Then Mary said: “Look! Jehovah’s slave girl! May it happen to me according to your declaration.” At that the angel departed from her.
39  So Mary set out in those days and traveled with haste into the mountainous country, to a city of Judah,
40  and she entered the home of Zech·a·riʹah and greeted Elizabeth.
41  Well, as Elizabeth heard the greeting of Mary, the infant in her womb leaped, and Elizabeth was filled with holy spirit
42  and loudly cried out: “Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruitage of your womb!
43  So how is it that this privilege is mine, to have the mother of my Lord come to me?
44  For look! as the sound of your greeting reached my ears, the infant in my womb leaped for joy.
45  Happy too is she who believed, for there will be a complete fulfillment of those things spoken to her from Jehovah.”
46  And Mary said: “My soul magnifies Jehovah,
47  and my spirit cannot keep from being overjoyed at God my Savior,
48  because he has looked upon the low position of his slave girl. For look! from now on all generations will declare me happy,
49  because the powerful One has done great deeds for me, and holy is his name,
50  and for generation after generation his mercy is upon those who fear him.
51  He has acted mightily with his arm; he has scattered those who are haughty in the intention of their hearts.
52  He has brought down powerful men from thrones and has exalted lowly ones;
53  he has fully satisfied hungry ones with good things and has sent away empty-handed those who had wealth.
54  He has come to the aid of Israel his servant, remembering his mercy,
55  just as he spoke to our forefathers, to Abraham and to his offspring, forever.”
56  Mary stayed with her about three months and then returned to her own home.
57  The time now came for Elizabeth to give birth, and she gave birth to a son.
58  And the neighbors and her relatives heard that Jehovah had magnified his mercy to her, and they rejoiced with her.
59  On the eighth day they came to circumcise the young child, and they were going to name him after his father, Zech·a·riʹah.
60  But his mother said in reply: “No! but he will be called John.”
61  At this they said to her: “Not one of your relatives is called by this name.”
62  Then they asked his father by signs what he wanted him to be called.
63  So he asked for a tablet and wrote: “John is his name.” At this they were all amazed.
64  Instantly his mouth was opened and his tongue was set free and he began to speak, praising God.
65  And fear fell upon all those living in their neighborhood, and all these things began to be talked about in the whole mountainous country of Ju·deʹa.
66  And all who heard noted it in their hearts, saying: “What will this young child turn out to be?” For the hand of Jehovah was indeed with him.
67  Then Zech·a·riʹah his father was filled with holy spirit, and he prophesied, saying:
68  “Let Jehovah be praised, the God of Israel, because he has turned his attention to his people and has brought them deliverance.
69  And he has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of David his servant,
70  just as he has spoken through the mouth of his holy prophets from of old,
71  of a salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all those hating us;
72  to show mercy in connection with our forefathers and to call to mind his holy covenant,
73  the oath that he swore to Abraham our forefather,
74  to grant us, after we have been rescued from the hands of enemies, the privilege of fearlessly rendering sacred service to him
75  with loyalty and righteousness before him all our days.
76  But as for you, young child, you will be called a prophet of the Most High, for you will go ahead of Jehovah to prepare his ways,
77  to give knowledge of salvation to his people by forgiveness of their sins,
78  because of the tender compassion of our God. With this compassion a daybreak will visit us from on high,
79  to give light to those sitting in darkness and death’s shadow and to guide our feet in the way of peace.”
80  And the young child grew up and became strong in spirit, and he continued in the desert until the day he showed himself openly to Israel.
2  Now in those days a decree went out from Caesar Au·gusʹtus for all the inhabited earth to be registered.
2  (This first registration took place when Qui·rinʹi·us was governor of Syria.)
3  And all the people went to be registered, each one to his own city.
4  Of course, Joseph also went up from Galʹi·lee, from the city of Nazʹa·reth, into Ju·deʹa, to David’s city, which is called Bethʹle·hem, because of his being a member of the house and family of David.
5  He went to get registered with Mary, who had been given him in marriage as promised and who was soon to give birth.
6  While they were there, the time came for her to give birth.
7  And she gave birth to her son, the firstborn, and she wrapped him in strips of cloth and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the lodging place.
8  There were also in the same region shepherds living out of doors and keeping watch in the night over their flocks.
9  Suddenly Jehovah’s angel stood before them, and Jehovah’s glory gleamed around them, and they became very fearful.
10  But the angel said to them: “Do not be afraid, for look! I am declaring to you good news of a great joy that all the people will have.
11  For today there was born to you in David’s city a savior, who is Christ the Lord.
12  And this is a sign for you: You will find an infant wrapped in strips of cloth and lying in a manger.”
13  Suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly army, praising God and saying:
14  “Glory in the heights above to God, and on earth peace among men of goodwill.”
15  So when the angels had departed from them into heaven, the shepherds began saying to one another: “Let us by all means go over to Bethʹle·hem and see what has taken place, which Jehovah has made known to us.”
16  And they went quickly and found Mary as well as Joseph, and the infant lying in the manger.
17  When they saw this, they made known the message that they had been told concerning this young child.
18  And all who heard were astonished at what the shepherds told them,
19  but Mary began to preserve all these sayings, drawing conclusions in her heart.
20  Then the shepherds went back, glorifying and praising God for all they had heard and seen, just as it had been told to them.
21  After eight days, when it was time to circumcise him, he was named Jesus, the name given by the angel before he was conceived.
22  Also, when the time came for purifying them according to the Law of Moses, they brought him up to Jerusalem to present him to Jehovah,
23  just as it is written in Jehovah’s Law: “Every firstborn male must be called holy to Jehovah.”
24  And they offered a sacrifice according to what is said in the Law of Jehovah: “a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons.”
25  And look! there was a man in Jerusalem named Simʹe·on, and this man was righteous and devout, waiting for Israel’s consolation, and holy spirit was upon him.
26  Furthermore, it had been divinely revealed to him by the holy spirit that he would not see death before he had seen the Christ of Jehovah.
27  Under the power of the spirit, he now came into the temple, and as the parents brought the young child Jesus in to do for him according to the customary practice of the Law,
28  he took the child into his arms and praised God and said:
29  “Now, Sovereign Lord, you are letting your slave go in peace according to your declaration,
30  because my eyes have seen your means of salvation
31  that you have prepared in the sight of all the peoples,
32  a light for removing the veil from the nations and a glory of your people Israel.”
33  And the child’s father and mother continued wondering at the things being spoken about him.
34  Also, Simʹe·on blessed them and said to Mary, the child’s mother: “Look! This child is appointed for the falling and the rising again of many in Israel and for a sign to be spoken against
35  (yes, a long sword will be run through you), in order that the reasonings of many hearts may be revealed.”
36  Now there was a prophetess, Anna the daughter of Phanʹu·el, of Ashʹer’s tribe. This woman was well along in years and had lived with her husband for seven years after they were married,
37  and she was a widow now 84 years old. She was never missing from the temple, rendering sacred service night and day with fasting and supplications.
38  In that very hour she came near and began giving thanks to God and speaking about the child to all who were waiting for Jerusalem’s deliverance.
39  So when they had carried out all the things according to the Law of Jehovah, they went back into Galʹi·lee to their own city, Nazʹa·reth.
40  And the young child continued growing and getting strong, being filled with wisdom, and God’s favor continued upon him.
41  Now his parents were accustomed to go from year to year to Jerusalem for the festival of the Passover.
42  And when he was 12 years old, they went up according to the custom of the festival.
43  When the days of the festival were over and they were returning, the boy Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem, and his parents did not notice it.
44  Assuming that he was in the group traveling together, they went a day’s journey and then began to search for him among the relatives and acquaintances.
45  But not finding him, they returned to Jerusalem and made a diligent search for him.
46  Well, after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers and listening to them and asking them questions.
47  But all those listening to him were in constant amazement at his understanding and his answers.
48  Now when his parents saw him, they were astounded, and his mother said to him: “Child, why did you treat us this way? Here your father and I have been frantically looking for you.”
49  But he said to them: “Why were you looking for me? Did you not know that I must be in the house of my Father?”
50  However, they did not understand what he was saying to them.
51  Then he went down with them and returned to Nazʹa·reth, and he continued subject to them. Also, his mother carefully kept all these sayings in her heart.
52  And Jesus went on progressing in wisdom and in physical growth and in favor with God and men.
3  In the 15th year of the reign of Ti·beʹri·us Caesar, when Pontius Pilate was governor of Ju·deʹa, Herod was district ruler of Galʹi·lee, Philip his brother was district ruler of the country of It·u·raeʹa and Trach·o·niʹtis, and Ly·saʹni·as was district ruler of Ab·i·leʹne,
2  in the days of chief priest Anʹnas and of Caʹia·phas, God’s declaration came to John the son of Zech·a·riʹah in the wilderness.
3  So he went into all the country around the Jordan, preaching baptism in symbol of repentance for forgiveness of sins,
4  just as it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet: “A voice of one crying out in the wilderness: ‘Prepare the way of Jehovah! Make his roads straight.
5  Every valley must be filled up, and every mountain and hill leveled; the crooked ways must become straight, and the rough ways smooth;
6  and all flesh will see the salvation of God.’”
7  So he began to say to the crowds coming out to be baptized by him: “You offspring of vipers, who has warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
8  Therefore, produce fruits that befit repentance. Do not start saying to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ For I say to you that God is able to raise up children for Abraham from these stones.
9  Indeed, the ax is already lying at the root of the trees. Every tree, then, that does not produce fine fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.”
10  And the crowds were asking him: “What, then, should we do?”
11  In reply he said to them: “Let the man who has two garments share with the man who has none, and let the one who has something to eat do the same.”
12  Even tax collectors came to be baptized, and they said to him: “Teacher, what should we do?”
13  He said to them: “Do not demand anything more than the tax rate.”
14  Also, those in military service were asking him: “What should we do?” And he said to them: “Do not harass anybody or accuse anybody falsely, but be satisfied with your provisions.”
15  Now the people were in expectation and all of them were reasoning in their hearts about John, “May he perhaps be the Christ?”
16  John gave the answer, saying to all: “I, for my part, baptize you with water, but the one stronger than I am is coming, the lace of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie. He will baptize you with holy spirit and with fire.
17  His winnowing shovel is in his hand to clean up his threshing floor completely and to gather the wheat into his storehouse, but the chaff he will burn up with fire that cannot be put out.”
18  He also gave many other exhortations and continued declaring good news to the people.
19  But Herod the district ruler, because of being reproved by John concerning He·roʹdi·as the wife of his brother and concerning all the wicked deeds that Herod had done,
20  added this also to all those deeds: He locked John up in prison.
21  Now when all the people were baptized, Jesus too was baptized. As he was praying, the heaven was opened up,
22  and the holy spirit in bodily form like a dove came down upon him, and a voice came out of heaven: “You are my Son, the beloved; I have approved you.”
23  When Jesus began his work, he was about 30 years old, being the son, as the opinion was,of Joseph,son of Heʹli,
24  son of Matʹthat,son of Leʹvi,son of Melʹchi,son of Janʹna·i,son of Joseph,
25  son of Mat·ta·thiʹas,son of Aʹmos,son of Naʹhum,son of Esʹli,son of Nagʹga·i,
26  son of Maʹath,son of Mat·ta·thiʹas,son of Semʹe·in,son of Joʹsech,son of Joʹda,
27  son of Jo·anʹan,son of Rheʹsa,son of Ze·rubʹba·bel,son of She·alʹti·el,son of Neʹri,
28  son of Melʹchi,son of Adʹdi,son of Coʹsam,son of El·maʹdam,son of Er,
29  son of Jesus,son of E·li·eʹzer,son of Joʹrim,son of Matʹthat,son of Leʹvi,
30  son of Symʹe·on,son of Judas,son of Joseph,son of Joʹnam,son of E·liʹa·kim,
31  son of Meʹle·a,son of Menʹna,son of Matʹta·tha,son of Nathan,son of David,
32  son of Jesʹse,son of Oʹbed,son of Boʹaz,son of Salʹmon,son of Nahʹshon,
33  son of Am·minʹa·dab,son of Arʹni,son of Hezʹron,son of Peʹrez,son of Judah,
34  son of Jacob,son of Isaac,son of Abraham,son of Teʹrah,son of Naʹhor,
35  son of Seʹrug,son of Reʹu,son of Peʹleg,son of Eʹber,son of Sheʹlah,
36  son of Ca·iʹnan,son of Ar·pachʹshad,son of Shem,son of Noah,son of Laʹmech,
37  son of Me·thuʹse·lah,son of Eʹnoch,son of Jaʹred,son of Ma·haʹla·le·el,son of Ca·iʹnan,
38  son of Eʹnosh,son of Seth,son of Adam,son of God.
12  In the meantime, when a crowd of so many thousands had gathered together that they were stepping on one another, he started by saying first to his disciples: “Watch out for the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
2  But there is nothing carefully concealed that will not be revealed, and nothing secret that will not become known.
3  Therefore, whatever you say in the darkness will be heard in the light, and what you whisper in private rooms will be preached from the housetops.
4  Moreover, I say to you, my friends, do not fear those who kill the body and after this are not able to do anything more.
5  But I will show you whom to fear: Fear the One who after killing has authority to throw into Ge·henʹna. Yes, I tell you, fear this One.
6  Five sparrows sell for two coins of small value, do they not? Yet not one of them is forgotten by God.
7  But even the hairs of your head are all numbered. Have no fear; you are worth more than many sparrows.
8  “I say to you, everyone who acknowledges me before men, the Son of man will also acknowledge him before the angels of God.
9  But whoever disowns me before men will be disowned before the angels of God.
10  And everyone who says a word against the Son of man, it will be forgiven him, but whoever blasphemes against the holy spirit will not be forgiven.
11  When they bring you in before public assemblies, government officials, and authorities, do not become anxious about how or what you will speak in defense or what you will say,
12  for the holy spirit will teach you in that very hour the things you should say.”
13  Then someone in the crowd said to him: “Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me.”
14  He said to him: “Man, who appointed me judge or arbitrator between you two?”
15  Then he said to them: “Keep your eyes open and guard against every sort of greed, because even when a person has an abundance, his life does not result from the things he possesses.”
16  With that he told them an illustration, saying: “The land of a rich man produced well.
17  So he began reasoning within himself, ‘What should I do now that I have nowhere to gather my crops?’
18  Then he said, ‘I will do this: I will tear down my storehouses and build bigger ones, and there I will gather all my grain and all my goods,
19  and I will say to myself: “You have many good things stored up for many years; take it easy, eat, drink, enjoy yourself.”’
20  But God said to him, ‘Unreasonable one, this night they are demanding your life from you. Who, then, is to have the things you stored up?’
21  So it goes with the man who stores up treasure for himself but is not rich toward God.”
22  Then he said to his disciples: “That is why I say to you, stop being anxious about your lives as to what you will eat or about your bodies as to what you will wear.
23  For the life is worth more than food and the body more than clothing.
24  Consider the ravens: They neither sow seed nor reap; they have neither barn nor storehouse; yet God feeds them. Are you not worth much more than birds?
25  Who of you by being anxious can add a cubit to his life span?
26  If, therefore, you cannot do such a small thing, why be anxious about the remaining things?
27  Consider how the lilies grow: They neither toil nor spin; but I tell you that not even Solʹo·mon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these.
28  Now if this is how God clothes the vegetation in the field that today exists and tomorrow is cast into an oven, how much more will he clothe you, you with little faith!
29  So stop seeking what you will eat and what you will drink, and stop being in anxious suspense;
30  for all these are the things the nations of the world are eagerly pursuing, but your Father knows you need these things.
31  Instead, keep seeking his Kingdom, and these things will be added to you.
32  “Have no fear, little flock, for your Father has approved of giving you the Kingdom.
33  Sell your belongings and give gifts of mercy. Make money pouches that do not wear out, a never-failing treasure in the heavens, where no thief gets near and no moth consumes.
34  For where your treasure is, there your hearts will be also.
35  “Be dressed and ready and have your lamps burning,
36  and you should be like men waiting for their master to return from the marriage, so when he comes and knocks, they may at once open to him.
37  Happy are those slaves whom the master on coming finds watching! Truly I say to you, he will dress himself for service and have them recline at the table and will come alongside and minister to them.
38  And if he comes in the second watch, even if in the third, and finds them ready, happy are they!
39  But know this, if the householder had known at what hour the thief would come, he would not have let his house be broken into.
40  You also, keep ready, because at an hour that you do not think likely, the Son of man is coming.”
41  Then Peter said: “Lord, are you telling this illustration just to us or also to everyone?”
42  And the Lord said: “Who really is the faithful steward, the discreet one, whom his master will appoint over his body of attendants to keep giving them their measure of food supplies at the proper time?
43  Happy is that slave if his master on coming finds him doing so!
44  I tell you truthfully, he will appoint him over all his belongings.
45  But if ever that slave should say in his heart, ‘My master delays coming,’ and starts to beat the male and female servants and to eat and drink and get drunk,
46  the master of that slave will come on a day that he is not expecting him and at an hour that he does not know, and he will punish him with the greatest severity and assign him a part with the unfaithful ones.
47  Then that slave who understood the will of his master but did not get ready or do what he asked will be beaten with many strokes.
48  But the one who did not understand and yet did things deserving of strokes will be beaten with few. Indeed, everyone to whom much was given, much will be demanded of him, and the one who was put in charge of much will have more than usual demanded of him.
49  “I came to start a fire on the earth, and what more is there for me to wish if it has already been lit?
50  Indeed, I have a baptism with which to be baptized, and how I am distressed until it is finished!
51  Do you think I came to give peace on the earth? No, I tell you, but rather division.
52  For from now on there will be five in one house divided, three against two and two against three.
53  They will be divided, father against son and son against father, mother against daughter and daughter against mother, mother-in-law against daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law against mother-in-law.”
54  Then he also said to the crowds: “When you see a cloud rising in the west, at once you say, ‘A storm is coming,’ and it happens.
55  And when you see that a south wind is blowing, you say, ‘There will be a heat wave,’ and it occurs.
56  Hypocrites, you know how to examine the appearance of earth and sky, but why do you not know how to examine this particular time?
57  Why do you not judge also for yourselves what is righteous?
58  For example, when you are going with your legal opponent to a ruler, while on the way, get to work to settle the dispute with him so that he may not summon you before the judge, and the judge deliver you to the court officer, and the court officer throw you into prison.
59  I tell you, you will certainly not get out of there until you pay over your last small coin.”
