4  Finally, brothers, just as you received instruction from us on how you should walk in order to please God, just as you are in fact walking, we request you and appeal to you by the Lord Jesus to keep doing it more fully.
2  For you know the instructions we gave you through the Lord Jesus.
3  For this is the will of God, that you should be holy and abstain from sexual immorality.
4  Each one of you should know how to control his own body in holiness and honor,
5  not with greedy, uncontrolled sexual passion like the nations have that do not know God.
6  No one should go beyond proper limits and take advantage of his brother in this matter, because Jehovah exacts punishment for all these things, just as we told you previously and also strongly warned you.
7  For God has called us, not for uncleanness, but for holiness.
8  So, then, the man who disregards this is disregarding, not man, but God, who gives you his holy spirit.
9  However, concerning brotherly love, you do not need us to write to you, for you yourselves are taught by God to love one another.
10  In fact, you are doing so toward all the brothers in all of Mac·e·doʹni·a. But we urge you, brothers, to go on doing so in fuller measure.
11  Make it your aim to live quietly and to mind your own business and to work with your hands, just as we instructed you,
12  so that you may walk decently in the eyes of people outside and not need anything.
13  Moreover, brothers, we do not want you to be ignorant about those who are sleeping in death, so that you may not sorrow as the rest do who have no hope.
14  For if we have faith that Jesus died and rose again, so too God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep in death through Jesus.
15  For this is what we tell you by Jehovah’s word, that we the living who survive to the presence of the Lord will in no way precede those who have fallen asleep in death;
16  because the Lord himself will descend from heaven with a commanding call, with an archangel’s voice and with God’s trumpet, and those who are dead in union with Christ will rise first.
17  Afterward we the living who are surviving will, together with them, be caught away in clouds to meet the Lord in the air; and thus we will always be with the Lord.
18  So keep comforting one another with these words.
5  Now as for the times and the seasons, brothers, you need nothing to be written to you.
2  For you yourselves know very well that Jehovah’s day is coming exactly as a thief in the night.
3  Whenever it is that they are saying, “Peace and security!” then sudden destruction is to be instantly on them, just like birth pains on a pregnant woman, and they will by no means escape.
4  But you, brothers, you are not in darkness, so that the day should overtake you as it would thieves,
5  for you are all sons of light and sons of day. We belong neither to night nor to darkness.
6  So, then, let us not sleep on as the rest do, but let us stay awake and keep our senses.
7  For those who sleep, sleep at night, and those who get drunk are drunk at night.
8  But as for us who belong to the day, let us keep our senses and put on the breastplate of faith and love and the hope of salvation as a helmet
9  because God assigned us, not to wrath, but to the acquiring of salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ.
10  He died for us, so that whether we stay awake or are asleep, we should live together with him.
11  Therefore, keep encouraging one another and building one another up, just as you are in fact doing.
12  Now we request you, brothers, to show respect for those who are working hard among you and presiding over you in the Lord and admonishing you;
13  and to give them extraordinary consideration in love because of their work. Be peaceable with one another.
14  On the other hand, we urge you, brothers, to warn the disorderly, speak consolingly to those who are depressed, support the weak, be patient toward all.
15  See that no one repays injury for injury to anyone, but always pursue what is good toward one another and to all others.
16  Always be rejoicing.
17  Pray constantly.
18  Give thanks for everything. This is God’s will for you in Christ Jesus.
19  Do not put out the fire of the spirit.
20  Do not treat prophecies with contempt.
21  Make sure of all things; hold fast to what is fine.
22  Abstain from every form of wickedness.
23  May the God of peace himself sanctify you completely. And may the spirit and soul and body of you brothers, sound in every respect, be preserved blameless at the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ.
24  The one who is calling you is faithful, and he will surely do so.
25  Brothers, keep praying for us.
26  Greet all the brothers with a holy kiss.
27  I am putting you under the solemn obligation by the Lord to have this letter read to all the brothers.
28  The undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
1  Paul, Sil·vaʹnus, and Timothy, to the congregation of the Thes·sa·loʹni·ans in union with God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: May you have undeserved kindness and peace.
2  We always thank God when we mention all of you in our prayers,
3  for we continually remember your faithful work, your loving labor, and your endurance because of your hope in our Lord Jesus Christ in the presence of our God and Father.
4  For we know, brothers loved by God, his choosing of you,
5  because the good news we preach did not come to you with speech alone but also with power and with holy spirit and with strong conviction, just as you know what sort of men we became among you for your sakes.
6  And you became imitators of us and of the Lord, seeing that you accepted the word under much tribulation with joy of holy spirit,
7  so that you became an example to all the believers in Mac·e·doʹni·a and in A·chaʹia.
8  The fact is, not only has the word of Jehovah sounded out from you in Mac·e·doʹni·a and A·chaʹia but your faith in God has spread abroad in every place, so that we do not need to say anything.
9  For they themselves keep reporting about our first contact with you and how you turned to God from your idols to slave for a living and true God,
10  and to wait for his Son from the heavens, whom he raised up from the dead, namely, Jesus, who rescues us from the wrath that is coming.
2  You yourselves surely know, brothers, that our visit to you has not been without results.
2  For although we had first suffered and been insolently treated in Phi·lipʹpi, as you know, we mustered up boldness by means of our God to tell you the good news of God in the face of much opposition.
3  For the exhortation we give does not spring from error or from uncleanness or with deceit,
4  but just as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the good news, so we speak to please, not men, but God, who examines our hearts.
5  In fact, you know that we never used flattering speech or put on any false front with greedy motives; God is witness!
6  Nor have we been seeking glory from men, either from you or from others, though we could be an expensive burden as apostles of Christ.
7  On the contrary, we became gentle in your midst, as when a nursing mother tenderly cares for her own children.
8  So having tender affection for you, we were determined to impart to you, not only the good news of God but also our very selves, because you became so beloved to us.
9  Surely you remember, brothers, our labor and toil. We were working night and day, so that we would not put an expensive burden on any one of you, when we preached the good news of God to you.
10  You are witnesses, God is also, of how loyal and righteous and blameless we behaved toward you believers.
11  You well know that we kept exhorting and consoling you and bearing witness to each one of you, just as a father does his children,
12  so that you would go on walking worthily of God, who is calling you to his Kingdom and glory.
13  Indeed, that is why we also thank God unceasingly, because when you received God’s word, which you heard from us, you accepted it not as the word of men but, just as it truthfully is, as the word of God, which is also at work in you believers.
14  For you, brothers, became imitators of the congregations of God in union with Christ Jesus that are in Ju·deʹa, because you suffered at the hands of your own countrymen the same things that they also are suffering at the hands of the Jews,
15  who even killed the Lord Jesus and the prophets and persecuted us. Furthermore, they are not pleasing God, but are against the interests of all men,
16  as they try to prevent us from speaking to people of the nations so that these might be saved. In this way they always fill up the measure of their sins. But his wrath has at last come upon them.
17  But when we were separated from you, brothers, for just a short time (in person, not in our hearts), because of our strong desire, we made every effort to see you in person.
18  For this reason we wanted to come to you, yes I, Paul, tried not just once but twice; yet Satan cut across our path.
19  For what is our hope or joy or crown of exultation before our Lord Jesus at his presence? Is it not in fact you?
20  You certainly are our glory and joy.
3  So when we could bear it no longer, we thought it best to stay on alone in Athens;
2  and we sent Timothy, our brother and God’s minister in the good news about the Christ, to make you firm and comfort you regarding your faith,
3  so that no one might be shaken by these tribulations. For you yourselves know that we cannot avoid suffering such things.
4  For when we were with you, we used to tell you in advance that we would suffer tribulation, and that is what has happened, just as you know.
5  That is why, when I could bear it no longer, I sent to learn of your faithfulness, in case somehow the Tempter might have tempted you, and our labor might have turned out to be in vain.
6  But Timothy has just now come to us from you and has given us the good news about your faithfulness and love, that you always continue to remember us fondly and that you long to see us in the same way as we also do you.
7  That is why, brothers, in all our distress and tribulation, we have been comforted because of you and the faithfulness you demonstrate.
8  Because we are revitalized if you are standing firm in the Lord.
9  For how can we show our thanks to God concerning you in return for the great joy we feel before our God on your account?
10  Night and day we make supplications as earnestly as we can to see you in person and to supply what is lacking in your faith.
11  Now may our God and Father himself and our Lord Jesus make a way for us to come to you.
12  Moreover, may the Lord cause you to increase, yes, to abound in love for one another and for all, just as we do for you,
13  so that he may make your hearts firm, blameless in holiness before our God and Father at the presence of our Lord Jesus with all his holy ones.
